Note: Motor-piezoelectricity coupling driven high temperature fatigue device
The design and performance evaluation of a novel high temperature fatigue device simultaneously driven by servo motor and piezoelectric actuator is our focus. The device integrates monotonic and cyclic loading functions with a maximum tensile load of 1800 N, driving frequency of 50 Hz, alternating load of 95 N, and maximum service temperature of 1200 °C. Multimodal fatigue tests with arbitrary combinations of static and dynamic loads are achieved. At temperatures that range from RT to 1100 °C, the tensile and tensile-fatigue coupling mechanical behaviors of UM Co50 alloys are investigated to verify the feasibility of the device.
Subjected to the coupling effects of high temperature and fatigue load are a typical service condition and a failure essence of structural materials [1,2]. As the testing temperature increases, the complexity of instrumental setups increases due to the problems of grip design, temperature gradient, and thermal drift [3]. In order to minimize such inaccuracies, Ritchie et_al [4,5] fabricated a compact ultrahigh temperature heating chamber; specimen heating was achieved by six infrared halogen lamps with ellipsoidal reflectors arranged in a confocal configuration; and high temperature tensile tests of ceramic matrix composites were carried out. Fritz and Kiener [3] also presented a heating device with low drift applicable for in situ mechanical tests inside a scanning electron microscope. Considering that the actual loading condition of structural materials generally contains combinations of static and dynamic stresses, through mechanical testing with arbitrary combinations of static and dynamic loads at elevated temperatures, the accurate understanding of the fatigue failure mechanism of materials would be feasible [6–8]. Regarding the design and application of high temperature fatigue testing devices [9], Siddiqui et_al [10] used encircled infrared heating lamps to establish controllable thermal gradients for the in situ synchrotron X-ray measurement of thermal barrier coated cylindrical samples. Song et_al [11] used a hydraulic-driven fatigue instrument (designed by Shimadzu) with a maximum temperature of 800 °C and frequency of 10 Hz to investigate the effect of the stress ratio on fatigue life at elevated temperatures. Furthermore, regarding a miniature fatigue testing device with rapid response driven by piezoelectric ceramics [12], Zhang et_al [13] developed a bionic piezoelectric actuator, which allows the tensile and fatigue examinations inside the scanning electron microscope. Bathias [14] also presented a piezoelectric fatigue device integrating with a high frequency inductor to realize fatigue tests at 1000 °C.
However, the above research seldom mentioned piezoelectric-driven fatigue devices integrating with static loading and high temperature heating functions. This note proposes a novel horizontal high temperature fatigue device simultaneously driven by a servo motor and piezoelectric actuator. Correspondingly, static-dynamic coupling mechanical behaviors of a double V-notched UM Co50 alloy at temperatures that range from RT to 1100 °C are discussed.
The proposed fatigue testing system is shown in Fig. 1. The device mainly consists of three modules, including the piezo-driven fatigue module, heating module, and motor-driven tensile module. The schematic diagram of the measurement process is shown in Fig. 1(a); mechanical and temperature control parameters, such as strain rate, tensile pre-stress, fatigue alternating displacement, loading frequency, temperature, and heating/cooling rates, are set by the processor (IPC), respectively. Accordingly, a servo signal and sinusoidal signal are, respectively, set by a servo controller and waveform generator. The sinusoidal wave is then amplified by a power amplifier. A load sensor, displacement sensor [linear variable differential transformer (LVDT)], non-contact laser sensor, and thermocouple are used to measure the static stress-strain relation, strain amplitude, and temperature of specimens, respectively. During the fatigue tests, the stress closed loop control mode is set. The experimental testing system is also shown in Fig. 1(b). The fatigue module and tensile module are located symmetrically at both sides of the heating module (integrates inside the furnace), and a quartzose observation window is on the top of the furnace. Regarding the fatigue module, considering the fast response and compact size of piezoelectric stack (10 × 10 × 40 mm), a horizontal piezoelectric actuator is designed as the driven unit. A special flexure hinge with an annular closed groove is integrated in the piezoelectric actuator to ensure the compressive stress on the piezoelectric stack. A driving frequency of 50 Hz and alternating load of 95 N could be output by the module. Regarding the heating module [Fig. 1(c)], a group of U-type of silicon molybdenum bars and thermocouples are integrated inside the heating furnace; a uniform temperature field with a maximum service temperature of 1200 °C could be achieved. The material of the furnace’s inner chamber is high temperature resistant ceramics, and the intermediate layer of the furnace is filled with multi-layer insulation materials with a low thermal conductivity of 0.28 × 10^{−2} W/(mK). The thermocouple is located underneath the specimen with a constant height difference of 0.2 mm. Meanwhile, interlacing cooling channels are embedded inside the external wall of the furnace. Moreover, the clamping units of the grippers are also integrated inside the furnace, and the gap between the grippers and the furnace is also filled up with insulation materials. Similar to our previous research [15], the location relation between the upper and lower grippers is realized by a pair of wedged boss and groove to solve the alignment issue, and the gripping section of the specimen and the groove and boss present uniform wedged symmetrical structures. Regarding the motor-driven tensile module [Fig. 1(d)], the servo drive system, which consists of a servo motor, worm gear, ball screw, and linear guide, could provide a quasi-static tensile speed of 10 nm/s and a maximum tensile load of 1800 N. The cooling channels are embedded inside the gripers to reduce the temperature outside the furnace. Based on maximum heating power and cooling flow, the average heating (form RT to 1100 °C)/cooling (inverse process) rates of the furnace are 47 °C/min and 15 °C/min, respectively.
In addition, the temperature stability and gradients in the specimen’s gauge section are evaluated by both experimental tests and finite element analysis (FEA). UM Co50 alloy specimens with double V-notches are used. As shown in Fig. 2(a), by using a non-contact infrared thermometer with high resolution, the temperatures of five evenly spaced points on the surface of the gauge section (gauge length of 3.5 mm) are measured. The mathematical expectation differences among the five measurement points increase from 7.5 °C at elevated temperature of 500 °C–19.6 °C at 1100 °C. Accordingly, the maximum standard deviations also increase from 11.4 °C at 500 °C to 22.6 °C at 1100 °C. Similarly, as seen from the FEA results in Fig. 2(b), based on the same analysis method, the maximum temperature differences increase from 0.7 °C to 3.6 °C as the elevated temperature gradually increases from 500 °C to 1100 °C. Therefore, considering the thermal conductivity of the UM Co50 alloy [69 W/(mK)], the temperature gradients in the gauge section are not apparent, and the temperature stability of the furnace is preliminarily verified.
In order to verify the feasibility of the device, the static tensile response of the UM Co50 alloy (elemental composition: Co-50.5%, Fe-19.9%, Cr-28.6%) at temperatures which range from RT to 1100 °C are investigated as shown in Fig. 3. A standard and uniform plate specimen is utilized to calculate the σ-ε curves. Based on a constant strain rate of 10^{−5} s^{−1}, measured Young’s modulus E_{m} decreases from 212.6 ± 27.6 GPa at RT to 122.8 ± 26.1 GPa at 1100 °C, and the yield strength σ_{s} and tensile strength σ_{b} also present sharp downward trends. Specifically, σ_{s} and σ_{b} decrease from 631.4 ± 21.2 MPa at RT to 69.7 ± 11.2 MPa at 1100 °C and from 925.6 ± 27.4 MPa at RT to 76.1 ± 12.3 MPa at 1100 °C, respectively. However, the elongation δ first goes up and then declines: at 900 °C, δ achieves its maximum value of 0.45 ± 0.07, while at 1100 °C, δ drops down to 0.27 ± 0.06, which indicates that the thermal deformability of the UM Co50 alloy weakens as the service temperatures achieves 900 °C or higher.
Furthermore, the stress responses of UM Co50 alloys as a function of time under tensile-fatigue coupling loads at various temperatures are obtained as shown in Fig. 4. Specimens with double V-notches are prepared to establish relatively large concentration coefficient. During the fatigue tests, various initial static pre-stresses are set at the elastic, strain-hardening, and necking stages. Three obvious characteristics could be summarized. First, as the temperature increases from RT to 700 °C, the fatigue life of the UM Co50 alloy gradually decreases, and the coupling effects of cyclic load and temperature weaken the resistance to deformation. Second, when the temperature increases to 900 °C, the stress amplitudes at various deformation stages decrease significantly. This phenomenon is mainly caused by the transformation from elastoplastic to viscoelasticity of the Co50 alloy. Third, at the same temperatures, the maximum stress differences between the tensile-fatigue coupling tests (σ_{tf-max}) and static tensile tests (σ_{t-max}) present a trend of gradual decrease. Specifically, at RT, σ_{tf-max} is slightly larger than σ_{t-max} with stress difference △σ of 15.2 ± 5.2 MPa, which shows the cyclic softening behavior of the Co50 alloy. As the temperatures increase from 500 °C to 900 °C, △σ are calculated as 15.4 ± 5.6 MPa, 54.9 ± 13.9 MPa, and 66.2 ± 19.6 MPa, respectively. The effect of temperatures on the promotion of cyclic softening is proved. In addition, as seen from the stress responses at 500 °C and 700 °C, the downward trend of mean stress becomes more obvious as the plastic deformations gradually increase, which coincides with our previous study [8] regarding the effects of cyclic stress on the stress relaxation. Therefore, although the piezoelectric-driven fatigue devices have been described in our previous studies [8,15], the grip design, heating/cooling method, maximum temperature, and static dynamic coupling performances are more advanced.
In conclusion, a novel device to perform fatigue testing of miniature specimens at high temperatures, with arbitrary combinations of static and dynamic loads, is developed. The temperature stability is evaluated without obvious temperature gradient in the specimen’s gauge section. At temperatures that range from RT to 1100 °C, static tensile σ-ε curves and tensile-fatigue coupling mechanical performances of the Co50 alloy are obtained to verify the feasibility of the device. As the elevated temperatures increase, the resistance to the deformation of the Co50 alloy gradually weakens, and the effect of temperatures on the promotion of cyclic softening behavior is proved.
FIG. 1. 
Testing system including a (a) schematic of the measurement process, (b) experimental testing system, (c) heating module, and (d) tensile module.
FIG. 2. 
Temperature stability and gradients in the specimen’s gauge section.
FIG. 3. 
Tensile σ-ε curves of UM Co50 alloys at various temperatures.
FIG. 4. 
Tensile-fatigue coupling mechanical behaviors of double V-notched UM Co50 specimens at various temperatures that range from RT to 900 °C.
