The phosphor temperature measurement of white light-emitting diodes based on magnetic nanoparticle thermometer
There is much debate about whether the junction temperature or phosphor temperature is higher in white light-emitting diodes (LEDs). The main reason is that the junction and phosphor temperatures cannot be measured directly using traditional temperature measurement tools. In this study, a magnetic nanoparticle thermometer, a nondestructive and precise temperature measurement tool, is introduced and described in detail. The model, measurement principle, and experimental setup are described. The temperature of the phosphor layer and the top surface of the P-N junction in white LEDs was measured directly using the magnetic nanoparticle thermometer, and the results show that the phosphor layer temperature was higher than the chip top surface temperature at different input voltages, providing a reference for relative researchers.
I. INTRODUCTION
White light-emitting diodes (LEDs), the fourth generation light source, are extensively used in industrial applications, in transportation, and in settings that are part of normal daily life [1–4]. The thermal management of LEDs is becoming increasingly problematic because increasingly powerful white LEDs and LEDs with increasing integration densities are being developed. LED chips are considered to be the dominant or only heat sources when the thermal management of LED packages and applications is considered. Conventional thermal solutions therefore involve merely aiming to keep the LED junction/chip temperature as low as possible. However, the phosphor layer in a white LED generates a considerable amount of heat during the photoluminescence process, and the phosphor temperature has been found to be higher than the junction temperature in some studies [5–8]. There is fierce debate about whether the junction temperature or phosphor temperature is higher in a white LED. However, Arik et_al performed finite-element simulations and found that the phosphor temperature was higher than the junction temperature [5–8]. The silicone carbonization phenomenon has been observed experimentally, and the results explain why the phosphor temperature is higher than the junction temperature [6]. Simulations have shown that changing the phosphor location and concentration alters the maximum temperature of a white LED [8]. However, no direct experimental proof that the phosphor temperature is higher than the junction temperature in a white LED is available as yet.
One problem is that currently available temperature measurement methods cannot be used to measure the internal temperature of a white LED accurately. Keppens et_al [9] proposed the forward voltage method, which relies on the linear relationship between the junction temperature and the forward voltage of an LED chip excited by a constant current. However, the limitations of the test conditions and the principles involved mean that the forward voltage method damages the integrity and the working environment of the product. Hong and Narendran [10] proposed the peak wavelength detection method, the principle of which is that the peak wavelength of a LED spectrum is offset by the increase in the junction/chip temperature. The junction/chip temperature can therefore be determined by measuring the difference between the actual and theoretical peak wavelengths. This temperature measurement method does not require the internal structure of the LED to be changed, but it is difficult to use it to measure the junction/chip temperature of a monochromatic LED. Natarajan et_al [11] demonstrated that Raman spectroscopy can measure the temperature of different layers in the ultraviolet light-emitting diodes. The magnetic nanoparticle thermometer (MNPT) is a noncontact and precise tool for measuring the internal temperature of an object. MNPTs have been found to be useful in a number of applications. Weaver et_al [12–14] found experimentally that the temperature can be measured using the ratio between the third and fifth magnetization harmonics induced in magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) by an ac magnetic field. Liu et_al [15,16] developed MNPT methods using the Langevin function and ac and dc magnetization. In a previous study [17,18], we investigated the single frequency temperature measurement model using the amplitudes of the first and third harmonics of MNP magnetization induced by an applied single frequency ac magnetic field to estimate the junction/chip temperature of an LED. The temperature error was <0.1 K over the range 298–358 K. It was difficult to maintain a temperature accuracy of 0.1 K at temperatures >358 K because the amplitudes of the harmonics decrease as the temperature increases.
In this study, we developed a dual-frequency temperature measurement model and used a dual-frequency excitation ac magnetic field to construct an MNPT that could be used over a wide temperature range. The P-N junction top surface and phosphor layer temperatures of a white LED were measured using the MNPT. The model, measurement principle, experimental setup, and processes are presented in detail.
II. MODEL AND SIMULATION
A. Model
The MNP is a kind of superparamagnetic material that is sensitive to temperature and can be used to measure the temperature under extreme conditions. The nonlinear magnetization responses of ideal MNPs exposed to an applied ac magnetic field can be described by the Langevin function, as shown in Eq. (1),
where ϕ is the MNP volume fraction, M_{S} is the saturation magnetization, V_{0} is the particle volume, H is the applied ac magnetic field, K_{B} is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The applied ac magnetic field has two frequencies, H = H_{1} sin(ω_{1}t) + H_{2} sin(ω_{2}t). So Eq. (1) can be expressed as shown in Eq. (2),
We simulated the temperature sensitivities of MNPs. When magnetic nanoparticles are exposed to an applied ac magnetic field with frequencies f_{1} = 46 Hz and f_{2} = 175 Hz, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the magnetization response and strength at temperatures of 300, 330, 360, and 390 K can be described as shown in Figs. 1(b) and 1(c). It can be seen from the figure that the MNP magnetization decreases as the temperature increases. The applied magnetic field has two different frequency components, so more combined frequency components can be obtained using the fast Fourier transform algorithm, as shown in Fig. 1(d).
Fourier series expansion of Eq. (2) allows the magnetization response of MNPs to be expressed as shown in Eq. (3),
Consolidating similar items on a frequency basis allows M to be expressed as shown in Eq. (4),
where A_{2i−1} is the amplitude of an odd harmonic based on the frequency ω_{1}, B_{i+j} is the amplitude of a harmonic based on the hybrid frequency of ω_{1} and ω_{2}, and C_{2j−1} is the amplitude of an odd harmonic based on the frequency ω_{2}. When MNPs are exposed to a dual-frequency applied ac magnetic field, there are two categories of harmonic components, (1) odd harmonics based on the frequency ω_{1} or ω_{2} and (2) harmonics based on the hybrid frequency of ω_{1} and ω_{2}. The hybrid frequency harmonics have particular characteristics, including that the absolute sum of the coefficients of ω_{1} and ω_{2} must be an odd number.
Through the analysis of harmonics expression, the MNP volume fraction ϕ and the temperature T are unknown. The temperature information cannot be obtained with only one harmonic component. However, the amplitude of harmonic is proportional to the MNP volume fraction ϕ, and thus, utilizing the simultaneous equations with two harmonic expressions can avoid the influence of volume fraction. This means that the temperature of MNP can be obtained without the information of volume fraction. The MNP exposed dual-frequency excited magnetic field has more frequency components than the MNP exposed single frequency excited magnetic field. Which two frequency components should be chosen for building the simultaneous equations? The three main factors should be considered when choosing harmonic components for temperature estimate. First, the selected frequency components should have large signal amplitude. Assuming that the background noise of the system is constant, selecting frequency components with large signal amplitude means that the temperature measurement system will have a large signal-to-noise ratio. As shown in Fig. 1(d), the fundamental frequencies ω_{1} and ω_{2} have large signal amplitude. The amplitude of fundamental frequency is about 1.6 times of frequency components with hybrid frequency coefficients (the absolute sum of the coefficients of ω_{1} and ω_{2}) of 3. Second, there should be no equivalence between the amplitude expressions of the selected frequency components. The amplitudes of the two fundamentals ω_{1} and ω_{2} would be the most suitable in terms of the maximum signal. However, the amplitude expression of fundamental ω_{1} is equivalent to that of fundamental ω_{2}. Consequently, the simultaneous equations, which are established by the amplitude expressions of the fundamental frequencies ω_{1} and ω_{2}, cannot be solved. Meanwhile, we found that there is equivalence between amplitude expressions of the frequency components with the same hybrid frequency coefficients. Third, on the premise that the harmonic amplitude expressions of the selected frequency components are not equivalent, it is important not only to have large signal amplitude (regarding high SNR) but also to have a large temperature sensitivity (temperature coefficient). For this reason, we simulated the temperature sensitivity dM_{i,j}/dT (i is the coefficient of fundamental ω_{1} and j is the coefficient of fundamental ω_{2}) of frequency components less than 1.5 kHz at different temperatures. It can be seen from the simulation results shown in Fig. 2 that the temperature sensitivity of different frequency components is similar to the amplitude of different frequency components. The fundamental ω_{1} and ω_{2} have the two largest temperature sensitivities at different temperatures, and the following are the frequency components with hybrid frequency coefficients of 3. Therefore, in order to avoid the equivalence between the selected frequency components and ensure that the frequency components have large signal amplitude and temperature sensitivity, we choose the fundamental frequency ω_{2} and the hybrid frequency harmonic (ω_{1} + 2ω_{2}) for temperature estimation, as shown in Eq. (5),
where x = M_{S}V_{0}/K_{B}T. Solving Eq. (5) allows the temperature to be measured using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.
B. Simulation
We performed some simulations to verify the accuracies of the temperatures determined using the single frequency and dual frequency temperature measurement models. In our simulation, the single-frequency ac magnetic field has an amplitude of 4.6 kA/m and a frequency of 175 Hz, and the dual-frequency ac magnetic field frequencies were 46 and 175 Hz and the valid amplitude was 4.6 kA/m. The simulation was performed for monodisperse MNPs with 10 nm core diameter, a volume fraction of 1.5 × 10^{−5}, and a saturation magnetization of 477 kA/m. White Gaussian noise with different signal-to-noise ratios was added to the MNP magnetization signals produced using the single-frequency and dual-frequency temperature measurement models. The digital phase-sensitive detection algorithm was used to determine the amplitudes of the harmonics. The temperature was calculated using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm; then, the true temperature was subtracted to give the temperature errors for the different signal-to-noise ratios (60, 70, 80, and 90 dB). The simulation results for the signal-to-noise ratios of 60, 70, 80, and 90 dB are shown in Figs. 3(a) and 2(b)–2(d), respectively. As shown in Fig. 2, the temperature errors for both the single frequency and dual frequency models increased as the signal-to-noise ratio decreased. However, the temperature errors were larger for the single frequency model than for the dual frequency model.
III. SYSTEM
A. System configuration
The MNP temperature measurement model is described in detail above. The system used to measure the temperatures of the LED pn-junctions using the MNPT is shown in Fig. 4. The system consisted of three parts, a magnetic field generator, a harmonic detector, and an LED driver. The magnetic field generator consisted of a power amplifier, a low pass power filter, a power resistor, and a pair of Helmholtz coils and was used to produce the stable dual-frequency ac magnetic field. The harmonic detector, which consisted of a pair of air-core pickup coils, a brand pass filter, and a preamplifier, was used to measure the harmonics of the MNP magnetization responses. The LED driver, which consisted of a power driver and a resistor, provided a voltage to the LED.
B. System optimization
Several factors, including the purity of the applied dual-frequency magnetic field and the stability of the strength of the applied magnetic field, affect the precision with which the temperature can be measured using the MNPT. The temperature sensitivity of the harmonic amplitude was used to measure the internal temperature of the LED when the MNPs were exposed to the dual frequency magnetic field. Operating the switches of other instruments in the laboratory causes interference in the power line supplying the MNPT, so the experimental system was provided with a separate earth wire. A power amplifier was needed to amplify the original signal to drive the Helmholtz coils. However, total harmonic distortion caused by a general power amplifier produces more harmonic noise as well as amplifies the source signal. Therefore, a power amplifier that caused as little total harmonic distortion as possible was used to drive the coils.
Long-term stability is an important requirement for the pn-junction and phosphor temperature measurement system using the MNPT. When the MNPT is used for an extended period, the Helmholtz coils produce heat, which changes the resistance, inductance, and other characteristics of the system. A power sample resistor was installed in series with the Helmholtz coils to monitor fluctuations in the dual-frequency excitation magnetic field. The waveform and spectrum of the dual frequency excitation magnetic field (at 46 and 175 Hz) collected by using the power sample resistors are shown in Fig. 5. The control circuit was a closed loop, and a stable exciting magnetic field was obtained by adjusting the power amplifier gain using a proportional-integral-derivative control algorithm. As shown in Fig. 6, the amplitude (valid values) of the dual frequency excitation magnetic field fluctuated by <0.008 kA/m, meeting the long-term stability requirements of the system.
When MNPs are exposed to a dual-frequency excitation magnetic field, the MNP magnetization becomes contaminated with the residual magnetic field. The output signal of the pickup coils contains the MNP magnetization and residual magnetic field, so the residual must be minimized before the temperature is measured. The residual magnetic field only was detected by the inductance coil before the MNP sample was placed in the measurement system. The characteristic parameters of the residual magnetic field (the amplitude and phase angle) were extracted first using the digital phase sensitive detection algorithm and then stored. The residual magnetic field spectrum is shown in Fig. 7(a). The residual magnetic field was then reconstructed in LabVIEW using the extracted characteristic parameters. Once the MNP sample had been placed in the measurement system, the residual magnetic field and MNP magnetization were both detected by the inductance coil. The residual magnetic field was subtracted to give the reconstructed signal shown in Fig. 7(b). The residual magnetic field was totally suppressed. The MNP magnetization frequency spectrum found when the MNPs were placed in the measurement system is shown in Fig. 7(c).
IV. VERIFICATION OF THE ACCURACY OF THE MNPT AND EXPERIMENTAL PROOF
A. Experiments to compare the MNPT and Pt100 thermometer performances
Contrasting experiments were performed using the MNPT and Pt100 thermometers to assess the stability and performance of the MNPT system. The MNPs used in this study were commercially available EMG1400 (FerroTec, 10 nm, 360 kA/m). An MNP sample was placed in a glass tube and heated to 390 K in silicone oil. The glass tube containing the MNPs was then cooled by immersing it in a mixture of ice and water. The MNPT and Pt100 thermometer [calibrated using a 5627A system (Fluke Corporation, Everett, WA, USA)] were simultaneously used to measure the temperature of the MNPs during the cooling process. As shown in Fig. 8, the temperature trends measured using the MNPT and Pt100 thermometer were essentially the same. The open circles are the temperatures measured using the MNPT, and it can be seen that these matched the temperature curve (the line) measured using the Pt100 thermometer. The temperature measured using the MNPT differed by <0.1 K from that measured using the Pt100 thermometer. Since the permeability of metal platinum is almost the same as that of air, we can consider that the effect of Pt100 on the magnetization response of magnetic nanoparticles is consistent with that of air.
B. Experimental measurements of the LED junction and phosphor temperatures
Our primary goal was to provide direct experimental data for relative researchers, by direct measurement of the LED junction/chip and phosphor temperatures. The layered structures of the LED samples tested are shown in Fig. 9. The MNPs mixed with silica gel in Sample 1 were directly coated on the top surface of the LED chip without any phosphor particles. In Sample 2, the phosphor particles (YAG:Ce^{3+}) mixed with MNPs were embedded in silica gel and then coated on the LED chip. Sample 1 and Sample 2 were encapsulated by standard LED technology in transparent epoxy resin after curing at 150 °C for 3 h, respectively. The principle involved meant that the average temperature of the MNP layer was captured in the measurements. The MNPs in Sample 2 were mixed with the phosphor layer, so the measured MNP temperature could be considered to be the average temperature of the phosphor layer. The MNPs in Sample 1 were directly coated on the LED chip, so the measured MNP temperature could be considered to be the temperature of the LED junction/chip top surface.
Experiments to measure the LED junction/chip and phosphor layer temperatures were performed at input voltages of 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2 V. We first used the data acquisition card (NI USB-6356) to generate a steady sinusoidal wave voltage signal with dual frequencies (46 and 175 Hz) and an amplitude of 7.5 V. The sinusoidal wave signal was amplified using a linear power amplifier (AE 7224) and then passed through the low pass power filter and used to drive the Helmholtz coils to generate a steady ac magnetic field with a hybrid frequency and an amplitude of 1.15 kA/m. The reconstructed signal was used to subtract the residual magnetic field to eliminate the residual magnetic field and generate a null output. As a result, the output obtained when an LED sample was placed in the exciting magnetic field was the response of the LED sample alone. The LED samples containing MNPs were placed in the test zone, and the dc power supply was used to light up the LED at voltages of 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2 V. The temperature responses of the LED samples are shown in Fig. 10. The LED temperature before the dc power supply was turned on was similar to the ambient temperature (298 K). During the early stages of lighting the LED, the heat generated by it was not transferred quickly to the outside and accumulated within it because the ambient temperature was close to the LED temperature, resulting in the sharp rise in internal temperature. After a certain time, the LED temperature was significantly higher than the ambient temperature, and some of the heat was transferred to the surrounding environment, so the temperature began to rise more slowly. The highest stable phosphor temperatures were 307.8, 331.4, and 374.8 K at 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2 V, respectively. The chip temperature curve followed a similar trend, and the highest stable chip temperatures were 304.2, 314.3, and 326.8 K at 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2 V, respectively. Increasing the input voltage increased the temperature difference between the phosphor and the junction. The phosphor temperature was higher than the junction temperature, and the temperature difference increased from 3.6 to 17.1 K when the input voltage increased from 5.0 to 5.1 V and increased to 48 K when the input voltage was increased to 5.2 V. Increasing the input voltage from 5.0 to 5.2 V increased the phosphor layer temperature by 67 K but increased the junction temperature by only 22.6 K. The LED no longer generated heat when the dc power supply was turned off. The great temperature difference between the LED and the environment meant that heat was quickly transferred to the environment, causing the LED temperature to decrease rapidly. The LED gradually cooled to room temperature.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results indicate that the phosphor layer temperature was higher than the chip top surface temperature at the different voltages used. This is a direct experimental proof that the phosphor layer temperature is higher than the chip top surface temperature in a white LED. The chip temperature in a white LED cannot therefore be used alone to characterize the thermal performance of the LED. Furthermore, increasing the input voltage increased the temperature difference between the phosphor and the chip.
The explanation for this is as follows. Phosphor, a photoluminescent material, absorbs light emitted by a blue LED and generates heat through non-radiative electron transitions. The phosphor particles are encapsulated in a heat-insulating silicone layer [λ = ∼0.2 W/(m K)], forming a thermal barrier to prevent the dissipation of heat produced by the phosphor [19,20]. This implies that the phosphor reaches a higher temperature than the chip. Increasing the input voltage increases the amount of heat generated by both the chip and the phosphor, but the heat builds up more strongly in the phosphor layer due to the presence of the insulating layer, increasing the temperature difference between the chip and the phosphor.
The method developed is a nondestructive and precise means of measuring the temperature of the phosphor in a white LED using MNPs. The experimental processes are described in detail. The results of the experiments indicate that the phosphor temperature was higher than the LED chip temperature. At an input voltage of 5.2 V, the phosphor and chip temperatures were 374.8 and 326.8 K, respectively. The method presented here makes it possible to measure temperature as long as MNPs can be coated on or embedded within the interface/layer/material of interest. The method has a limitation in that it measures the average temperature, rather than the temperatures at different points, so we could not obtain 2D or 3D temperature distributions for the chips we studied. The MNP-based method could be improved to offer greater applicability in a wide range of contexts.
FIG. 1. 
Simulation of the temperature sensitivity of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). (a) The applied magnetic field. (b) The magnetization response of MNPs at 300, 330, 360, and 390 K. (c) The magnetization M of MNPs plotted against the intensity of the applied magnetic field at 300, 330, 360, and 390 K. (d) The MNP magnetization M spectrum. The amplitude of the applied magnetic field was 4.6 kA/m. The saturation magnetic moment of the MNPs was 477 kA/m.
FIG. 2. 
Simulated temperature sensitivity dM_{i}/dT of frequency components. The dual-frequency ac magnetic field frequencies were 46 and 175 Hz, and the valid amplitude was 4.6 kA/m. The saturation magnetic moment of the MNPs was 477 kA/m. The diameter of ideal magnetic nanoparticles is 10 nm.
FIG. 3. 
Simulations of the temperature errors found using the single frequency temperature measurement model and the dual frequency temperature measurement model with signal-to-noise ratios of 60, 70, 80, and 90 dB. (a) Simulation results for a signal-to-noise ratio of 60 dB. (b) Simulation results for a signal-to-noise ratio of 70 dB. (c) Simulation results for a signal-to-noise ratio of 80 dB. (d) Simulation results for a signal-to-noise ratio of 90 dB.
FIG. 4. 
Schematic of the system used to measure the temperature of the pn-junction of a light-emitting diode using the magnetic nanoparticle thermometer.
FIG. 5. 
Dual frequency excitation magnetic field waveform and spectrum monitored using the power sample resistor.
FIG. 6. 
Stabilizing process for the dual frequency excitation magnetic field.
FIG. 7. 
(a) Frequency spectrum for the unsuppressed residual magnetic field. (b) Frequency spectrum after suppression of the residual magnetic field. (c) Magnetic nanoparticle magnetization frequency spectrum. The amount of the MNP sample (EMG 1400, FeeroTec, 10 nm, 360 kA/m) is 2 g.
FIG. 8. 
Temperatures measured using the magnetic nanoparticle thermometer and a Pt100 thermometer.
FIG. 9. 
Schematic of the light-emitting diode (LED) samples in the temperature measurements: (a) Sample 1, with magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) coated directly on the top surface of LED chip, and (b) Sample 2, with MNPs mixed with the phosphor layer and coated on the LED chip.
FIG. 10. 
Phosphor layer temperature and junction top surface temperature when the light-emitting diode was heated by applying different input voltages.
