Bi-layer plate-type acoustic metamaterials with Willis coupling
Dynamic effective negative parameters are principal to the representation of the physical properties of metamaterials. In this paper, a bi-layer plate-type unit was proposed with both a negative mass density and a negative bulk modulus; moreover, through analysis of these bi-layer structures, some important problems about acoustic metamaterials were studied. First, dynamic effective mass densities and the bulk modulus of the bi-layer plate-type acoustic structure were clarified through both the direct and the retrieval methods, and, in addition, the intrinsic relationship between the sound transmission (absorption) characteristics and the effective parameters was analyzed. Furthermore, the properties of dynamic effective parameters for an asymmetric bi-layer acoustic structure were further considered through an analysis of experimental data, and the modified effective parameters were then obtained through consideration of the Willis coupling in the asymmetric passive system. In addition, by taking both the clamped and the periodic boundary conditions into consideration in the bi-layer plate-type acoustic system, new perspectives were presented for study on the effective parameters and sound insulation properties in the range below the cut-off frequency. The special acoustic properties established by these effective parameters could enrich our knowledge and provide guidance for the design and installation of acoustic metamaterial structures in future sound engineering practice.
I. INTRODUCTION
Metamaterials have been developed from the concept of a negative refractive index in classical waves. It is well documented that conventional materials have positive permittivity and permeability in electromagnetic systems, while in acoustic systems they offer positive mass density and bulk modulus. However, if metamaterials are constructed using subwavelength resonant units that enhance sound-matter interaction, it is possible to engineer the properties of the wave to obtain values of effective parameters that are not observed in nature [1]. Obviously, the effective parameters are the core of metamaterials, which are able to support almost all types of special physical phenomena. In 2000, Pendry proposed a design scheme for artificial structures with simultaneously negative magnetic permeability and permittivity [2], which was later experimentally verified [3]. In the same year, a locally resonant sonic material was proposed, and its negative effective mass was realized in the mechanical system [4]. In addition, the negative bulk modulus was demonstrated in an underwater ultrasonic via a one-dimensional fluid channel which was shunted sideways by a periodic chain of Helmholtz resonators [5]. In fact, early theoretical studies show that local resonance systems producing monopole and dipole resonances are the key for achieving negative mass density and negative bulk modulus, respectively [6,7]. Furthermore, in terms of metamaterials, effective parameters are always solved based on the effective media theory, and some methods have been proposed over the past ten years which provide a strong basis for the solution of effective parameters [8–11].
The successful realization of acoustic metamaterials with a single negative parameter has promoted attempts to achieve double negative parameters by combining two kinds of units, each with different single negative parameters. Li and Chan found that a double negative band with a simultaneous negative mass density and bulk modulus could be obtained by periodically arranging rubber beads in water [6]. Ding et_al designed a solid-based double resonant cell structure, in which one cell provided the dipole resonance to support the effective negative mass density, and another provided the monopole resonance to support the negative bulk modulus; the resonant frequencies of the two cells were adjusted to the same position and, in this way, the acoustic metamaterial with double negative parameters was obtained [7]. In 2009, by introducing a double resonant element to liquid, Zhang et_al obtained a frequency band simultaneously with effective negative mass density and bulk modulus, and further realized the negative refraction imaging and acoustic cloak [12,13]. The following year, Lee et_al realized a type of acoustic metamaterial that also had a simultaneously negative effective mass density and bulk modulus, by arranging double resonant elements within an airborne tube [14]. In their design proposal, periodically arranged elastic membranes were used to modulate the dipole resonance and to produce the monopole resonance via side openings; a double negative transmission band was obtained at the long-wave limit, and then an abnormal Doppler effect in the double negative band was further achieved experimentally [15]. In 2011, Wu et_al designed a type of elastic metamaterial with both a negative effective mass density and shear modulus produced by dipole and quadrupole resonances, respectively [16]. The researchers further proposed an elastic hybrid unit which could provide monopole, dipole, and quadrupole resonances, thus achieving the negative effective bulk modulus, mass density, and shear modulus [17]. Finally, in 2014, Yang et_al proposed a bi-layer membrane-type acoustic metamaterial, wherein the two membranes were coupled through the sealed air and a rigid ring. Here, the simultaneous negative mass density and bulk modulus were achieved both in theory and experiment [18]. Moreover, a small number of works have shown that the double-negative effective parameters can also be achieved by folding a geometric-induced band through labyrinth structures [19–21].
In summary, only a few design routes have been created for obtaining double negative parameters. For resonant type structures, simultaneously double negative parameters depend on the combination of the two systems to provide the monopole and dipole resonances. Indeed, the proposal of the bi-layer membrane-type double negative acoustic metamaterials, in which the simultaneously double negative parameters are achieved by coupling two layers of membrane in a single unit, is considered a breakthrough [18]. This paper aims to extend that work, with the design of bi-layer plate-type structures with both the negative mass density and the bulk modulus, to explore the properties of effective parameters for asymmetric bi-layer structures with Willis coupling and the effective parameters of acoustic metamaterials in the range below the cut-off frequency under different boundary conditions. Herein, the Willis coupling refers to a coupling of constitutive equations between the stress-strain and the momentum-velocity. This non-intuitive coupling arises from both non-local effects and material asymmetries [22–25]. The work offers the potential to update scientific knowledge about such effective parameters and has wide application significances for the design of sound attenuation barriers in low frequency ranges [26–32]. The structure of this paper is presented as follows: In Sec. II, a bi-layer thin-plate sample is fabricated and measured for its transmission and reflection coefficients; then, the effective mass density and the bulk modulus of the bi-layer plate-type structure are solved using both the direct and retrieval methods; and, finally, the intrinsic relationship between the sound transmission (absorption) characteristics and the effective parameters is analyzed. In Sec. III, the properties of the effective parameters for the asymmetric bi-layer plate-type structure are further analyzed by the experimental measurement data, and the modified effective parameters are obtained by considering the latest Willis coupling in the asymmetric structure. In Sec. IV, through the inclusion of both the clamped and periodic boundary conditions in the bi-layer plate-type acoustic system, effective parameters and sound insulation properties in the range below the cut-off frequency are studied from a new perspective. Lastly, the paper is briefly summarized in Sec. V.
II. BI-LAYER PLATE-TYPE ACOUSTIC METAMATERIAL AND EXPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENT
For the sake of simplicity, this study starts with a simple bi-layer plate-type unit, shown in Fig. 1(a), consisting of two identical circular plates with a diameter of D =40 mm and a thickness of h =0.2 mm. The distance between the two plates is H =20 mm. Stiff nylon was chosen as the material of two plates, which are fixed to a rigid frame, and the Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, and mass density of the nylon are (3 + 0.15i) GPa, 0.28, and 1000 kg/m^{3}, respectively. The imaginary part of the Young's modulus represents the viscoelastic damping loss of the material. The metamaterial unit was fabricated to experimentally measure the reflections (Exp-R) and transmissions (Exp-T) by employing a B&K Type-4206 impedance tube system [31]. The measurement sample is shown in Fig. 1(b), and the experiment data are plotted in Fig. 1(c). The reflections (Sim-R) and transmissions (Sim-T) were calculated through the use of the finite element numerical simulation model, which was carried out with COMSOL Multiphysics software. As evident in Fig. 1(c), two obvious transmission peaks (or reflection dips) (458 Hz and 948 Hz in Exp-T; 456 Hz and 977 Hz in Sim-T) were observed in both the measured and calculated results. The nonlinear increase of the actual material damping with the frequency could potentially lead to deviations between the measured and calculated results in amplitudes, and therefore, it was assumed that the fixed damping ratio would result in some deviations between the measured and calculated results. In addition, the home-made samples could produce certain unavoidable differences from the ideal calculation model, as well as deviations in the frequency positions. Such deviations notwithstanding, similar peak characteristics of the two groups of curves suggest that the numerical simulation results could be used to qualitatively characterize the basic physical properties of the structure.
Since the effective parameters are the core of the metamaterials, in addition to the reflection and transmission coefficients, the effective mass density and bulk modulus of the bi-layer plate-type system were calculated based on the effective media theories by both direct and retrieval methods [9,30]. For the direct method, the effective mass density could be described as
wherein 〈F_{z}〉 is the area-averaged force in z-direction applied on the sample, 〈w¨〉 is the area-averaged acceleration in the z-direction, and the sound wave incident from the plate side of z =0. For a circular plate
wherein P is the externally applied pressure.
Additionally, the effective bulk modulus is calculated by
wherein 〈σ_{b}〉 is the area-averaged bulk stress of the plate, 〈ε_{b}〉 is the averaged bulk strain of system, V is the static volume of the sealed air
is normal compressional stress averaged over both ends of the bi-layer plate-type system, and
is the volume change between the two plates.
For the retrieval method, as T and R are assumed as the sound transmission and reflection coefficients, respectively, then the acoustic impedance ξ and the refractive index n could be solved by the following relationships:
where
and
are two algebraic variables for eliminating the ambiguity in the expression for n, and m is the branches' number of the anti-cosine function cos^{−1}. For the structure without periodic distributions in the sound propagation direction, m =0, and the wave vector k takes the form as k=2πf/c_{0}, wherein f is the frequency, and c_{0} = 343 m/s is the sound speed in air.
Then, effective mass densities and bulk modulus could be solved through the acoustic impedance ξ and the refractive index n by
The calculated real values of effective mass densities by the two methods are shown as the red solid (Rhoeff-Direct) and dotted (Rhoeff-Retrieval-R) curves in Fig. 1(d), respectively, wherein both Rhoeff-Direct and Rhoeff-Retrieval-R remain negative in the range below 454 Hz (the yellow shaded area). The real values of the effective bulk modulus, as calculated by the two methods, are shown as the blue solid (Keff-Direct) and dotted (Keff-Retrieval-R) curves in Fig. 1(d), respectively, wherein both Keff-Direct and Keff-Retrieval-R turn negative above 978 Hz (the cyan shaded area) and 1018 Hz in the calculation range, respectively. The above-mentioned calculations show that the designed bi-layer plate-type structure is capable of producing both the negative mass density and bulk modulus in different frequency ranges, but does not produce the simultaneously double negative band at the same frequencies in the calculation range. A comparison between the calculated effective parameters and sound transmissions (reflections) suggests that both the effective mass densities calculated by the two methods are close to zero at the first transmission peak (reflection dip) frequency, while Keff-Direct approaches zero at the second transmission peak frequency. It could be understood that, due to the sound impedance, Z_{m}=ρ_{eff}K_{eff}, regardless of ρ_{eff}→0 or K_{eff}→0, Z_{m} will tend to zero, followed by the maximum sound transmissions at these frequencies. This property could also be explained by the related theory about near-zero effective parameters [33]. Since the direct method can be deduced by the definitions of effective parameters without any approximation, while the retrieval method is performed at the long-wave limit, the calculated effective parameters by the direct method will always be consistent with the transmission and reflection features, and the results calculated by the two methods agree well with each other only in low frequency ranges. The physical mechanism of the negative mass density for this bi-layer plate-type system lies in the fact that the two plates vibrate in-phase (even-type motion) and vibrate out-of-phase (anti-resonance) as a whole to the incident sound wave, while the negative bulk modulus results from the out-of-phase vibration between the two plates (odd-type motion). It should be noted that Keff-Direct and Keff-Retrieval-R go to zero at 978 Hz and 1018 Hz, respectively, which indicates the occurrence of infinitesimal effective wavelengths. In such case, homogenization assumptions are not valid, thus leading to some differences between the calculated effective bulk modulus by the direct and the retrieval methods in Fig. 1(d) near K_{eff}=0. In fact, at the frequency near K_{eff}=0, the Rhoeff-Retrieval-I in Fig. 1(d) changes from negative into positive, thus indicating the presence of non-local effects. Moreover, at anti-resonance frequencies, due to evidence that the phases will abruptly shift from a positive extreme position to a negative extreme position or vice versa, relationships of the above-mentioned effective parameter solution for both the direct and retrieval methods are divergent, which the result that ρ_{eff} tends to ±∞ and the effective wavelength in the sample also becomes infinitesimal. Therefore, at frequencies K_{eff}→0 or ρ_{eff}→±∞, due to the abruptly shifting phases of the reflected and transmitted acoustic waves, the average volume of the properties may not correctly associate with the dynamics of the system.
III. EFFECTIVE PARAMETERS OF ASYMMETRIC BI-LAYER STRUCTURES WITH WILLIS COUPLING
The two thin plates in the bi-layer structure illustrated in Fig. 1 have identical material parameters and the structure is symmetry; therefore, the sound transmissions, reflections, absorptions, and effective parameters are invariable, regardless of the wave incident from the front or back plate sides. Inversely, if the material parameters are different from each other, the structure becomes asymmetric, which could result in asymmetric properties in the effective parameters. Theoretically, since the two layers are separated by a layer of air, and relative motions are allowed, when the sound wave travels incidentally from different plate sides, the acceleration 〈w¨〉 of the whole vibration system in Eq. (1) will become different for the two layers, resulting in differences in their mass densities ρ_{eff}; furthermore, different ΔV in Eq. (3) will result in changes in their effective bulk moduli K_{eff}. More obviously, in Eqs. (6), (8) and (9), as the reflection coefficient R changes, but preserved by the time reversal symmetry property, T will remain unchanged, resulting in changes in the acoustic impedance ξ and refractive index n in Eqs. (10) and (11). Thus, the effective mass density ρ_{eff} and the bulk modulus K_{eff} will become different. The theoretical relationships in both the direct and retrieval methods imply that the effective parameters are dependent on the sound incident direction for the asymmetric structures and that they exhibit obvious asymmetric properties. Considering such a model (denoted as model-2) as the foundation for further investigation, one layer of the bi-layer structure used in Fig. 1 was changed from that of a nylon plate to a soft PET (polyethylene terephthalate) plate with a thickness of 0.2 mm, and the distance between the layers was reduced to 10 mm. In order to simplify presentation in this paper, the PET plate is denoted as A and the nylon plate as B. The sample for measurement was fabricated as shown in Fig. 2(a). In this, the sound transmissions, reflections, and absorptions are measured and plotted when the sound wave incidentally travels perpendicular to the sides of both plate A and plate B, as shown in Fig. 2(b). It is evident that sound transmission coefficients are consistent with each other in incidental sound waves from different sides, while the reflection and absorption coefficients are different. Specifically, in the range below 900 Hz, the reflection and absorption coefficients correspond substantially with each other. However, in the range above 900 Hz, Exp-RA is seen to be lower than Exp-RB, while, correspondingly, Exp-AA is higher than Exp-AB. This suggests that when the incidental sound waves are from different plates, the acoustic properties of a bi-layer structure have the potential to adjust from strong absorption into strong reflection, thus demonstrating an obviously asymmetric property.
Previous equivalent theories in the literature concerning acoustic metamaterials suggest that, compared with the size of the proposed structure, the concerned wavelength is much longer and that for this deep subwavelength structure the parameters should be insensitive to the direction [10,18]. However, the results of this study, as shown in Fig. 2(b), appear to be incongruent with previous assertions. In fact, according to a large number of studies in the literature, the insensitivity of the physical parameters of the subwavelength structure to the sound direction should only apply to those sound waves propagating into the structure incidentally from the same side of the half-space and at different angles, rather than from the other side of the half-space. Theoretically, if the two plates are glued together, the asymmetry should be negligible because the sound absorption coefficients of the system are always close to zero. This implies that when the incidental sound waves are from different plates, the appearance of asymmetric sound reflection and absorption coefficients arises from the sealed air layer between the two plates. On the one hand, such an air layer could support the relative motions between the plates, but, on the other hand, the hybrid resonance makes the strong sound absorptions probable [34]. Several previous literature studies could support our conclusions. In the work of Mei et_al [35], for example, in an effort to eliminate the acoustic transmission and realize higher sound absorption coefficients, a thick aluminum plate is arranged approximately 20 mm away from the membrane; the transmission coefficients of the aluminum plate are close to zero, while the reflection coefficients are close to 1. Consequently, with the sound waves propagating from the side of the aluminum plate, rather than from the membrane, it is clear that the reflection coefficients of the system are close to 1, while the sound absorption coefficients are almost zero—which is completely different from the strong sound absorption characteristics reported in previous literature. In fact, even if the sound waves travel incidentally from the side of the membrane and with different incidence angles, the sound absorption coefficients remain distinct from one another; that is, the structures in the literature also exhibit asymmetric sound absorption and reflection coefficients.
In addition, both the real and imaginary values of the effective parameters are calculated from the measured transmissions and reflections through Eqs. (6)–(11), as shown in Figs. 2(c) and 2(d). From the calculated real values of effective parameters in Fig. 2(c), it is evident that the effective mass densities and bulk moduli are consistent with each other in the range below 900 Hz, similar to the trends of reflection and absorption coefficients. However, in the range above 900 Hz, the effective parameters of the incidental sound waves from alternate sides start to differ. Specifically, Rhoeff-AR are higher than Rhoeff-BR between 900 Hz and 1260 Hz, but Rhoeff-BR are higher than Rhoeff-AR in the range of 1260–1600 Hz, while Keff-BR are higher than Keff-AR in the frequency range above 900 Hz. More importantly, in the yellow shaded areas indicated in Fig. 2(c), the mass densities of the structure are always negative, regardless of the incident directions of the sound wave; however, in the range of 1156–1260 Hz (cyan shaded area), Rhoeff-AR change to become positive, while Rhoeff-BR remain negative. These results reveal clearly that if the material parameters of the two layers of plates are different, then the effective parameters of the bi-layer structure will show an obvious asymmetric property. The asymmetric effective parameters are also evident in the imaginary values shown in Fig. 2(d). In the ranges below 220 Hz and 840–1580 Hz, Rhoeff-AI are significantly higher than Rhoeff-BI, while Rhoeff-AI are lower than Rhoeff-BI in the frequency range above 1580 Hz. Moreover, in the range of 300–380 Hz, Keff-AI are initially lower than Keff-BI, and then gradually become higher than Keff-BI. In the ranges of 580–800 Hz, 1296–1340 Hz, and above 1580 Hz, Keff-AI are significantly lower than Keff-BI, while in 800–1296 Hz and 1340–1580 Hz, Keff-AI are significantly higher than Keff-BI. These results clearly reveal that if the material parameters of the two layers of the plates are different, then the effective parameters (both the real and imaginary values) of the bi-layer structure will show an obvious asymmetric property.
Asymmetric reflections and sound absorptions are useful and could provide guidance for the installation of these metamaterials in engineering applications, in order to regulate sound fields. Nonetheless, the above property of asymmetric effective parameters is contrary to the original intention of the homogenization theory, which violates the general requirement to provide the affirmatory effective parameters for a particular passive metamaterial structure. To solve this problem, the researchers proposed the Willis coupling of asymmetric acoustics metamaterials, thus providing a modified method as a solution for obtaining uniform effective parameters [22–25]. In fact, the retrieval method (assuming e^{iωt} time dependence) used in Fig. 2 neglects the prerequisites of this method, namely that the real values of the acoustic impedance should be kept positive, while the imaginary values of the relative index should remain negative [8]. Furthermore, a reexamination of the results (not provided in this paper) revealed that, in the measurement frequency range, such prerequisites were not always satisfied, thus presenting another reason for the Willis coupling to be considered [22]. Therefore, a need was established for the modification of the effective parameter solution approach through consideration of the latest Willis coupling and subsequent resolution of the effective mass density and bulk modulus. The modified ξ, r, and x read
where R_{A} (R_{B}) is the reflection coefficient with the sound wave incident from the side of plate A (plate B). Furthermore, the asymmetry coefficient W and Willis coupling coefficient ψ read
where the sign of W is positive in the quasistatic limit and, at higher frequencies, the sign is determined by requiring W be a continuous function of frequency [22].
The calculated uniform effective mass density and bulk modulus obtained from the modified method are shown in Fig. 3(a). By comparing the results of Figs. 2(c) and 3(a), it can be seen that the second negative band of the effective mass density shifted significantly following consideration of the Willis coupling: from that of Rhoeff-R in Fig. 3(a) ranges from 1000 Hz to 1320 Hz, that of Rhoeff- AR in Fig. 2(c) from 900 Hz to 1172 Hz, and that of Rhoeff-BR from 900 Hz to 1260 Hz. In addition, it is evident that other features of the real values remained almost unchanged, while the imaginary values changed significantly—to almost negative across the entire measurement band in consideration of the Willis coupling. Moreover, to check the validity of the modified solution method, both the real values of the relative impedance and the imaginary values of the refractive index are plotted in Fig. 3(b). The results may be seen to satisfy the requirement that the real values of the relative impedance remain positive and the imaginary values of the relative refractive index are negative. As evidenced in both Figs. 2(d) and 3(a), due to the strong losses [22,23,25] at the frequencies near the absorption peaks of Exp-AA (Exp-AB) in Fig. 2(d), the imaginary values of the effective bulk modulus modify the sign. In addition, through Eqs. (15) and (16), the real and imaginary values of asymmetry coefficient W and Willis coupling coefficient ψ are plotted in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), respectively, indicating that both the asymmetry coefficient and Willis coupling coefficient are close to zero only in the measurement range below 330 Hz [the first yellow shaded band in Fig. 3(a)]. It is therefore clear that, for asymmetric acoustics metamaterial structures, if the Willis coupling is neglected, the asymmetric effective parameters will occur at higher frequencies, for which the asymmetry coefficient and Willis coupling coefficient are not close to zero.
IV. EFFECTIVE PARAMETERS AND SOUND INSULATION BELOW THE CUT-OFF FREQUENCY
Sound insulation and absorption are two important elements in the application of acoustic metamaterials. In particular, the initial motivation of the membrane and thin plate structures is solely to achieve strong sound attenuation in the low-frequency ranges [26–32]. In the sound insulation theory, a sound transmission loss (STL) curve is divided into four regions, namely, the stiffness control region, damping control region, mass control region, and anastomosis effect region, wherein the stiffness control region is a frequency band below the first STL dip (cut-off frequency). As its name suggests, the sound insulation property in the stiffness control region is determined primarily by the stiffness of the structure. Generally, the clamped boundary condition, used commonly in studies regarding the sound insulation properties of acoustic metamaterials, is equivalent to that of applying additional constraint stiffness on the structure to achieve a negative mass density band in the range below a cut-off frequency [36]. In fact, the perfect clamped boundary condition is difficult to satisfy in practical applications, especially in the case of large-scale structures commonly used in engineering practices.
In this section, the Floquet periodic boundary condition is employed to eliminate such an influence of the additional constraint on structures. The STLs of a bi-layer plate-type structure under both the clamped and periodic boundary conditions (denoted as models 3 and 4) were calculated and plotted in Fig. 4(a) (Sim-STL3 and Sim-STL4). In addition, a sample corresponding to model-3 was fabricated to measure its STLs (Exp-STL3), and then compared with the calculated results in Fig. 4(a). The identical radius and thickness of the two plates were 20 mm and 0.2 mm, respectively; the plates were fixed by a rigid frame with a thickness of 10 mm and side length of 48 mm. Rigid nylon was selected as the material for the plates, while a type of photosensitive resin was chosen as the frame material, fabricated by means of 3D printing. The Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, and mass density of the photosensitive resin (2.2 + 0.22i) GPa, 0.375, and 1000 kg/m^{3}, respectively. As indicated in Fig. 4(a), the dips of Sim-STL3 and Sim-STL4 can be seen at the same frequency. However, due to the difference in boundary conditions, in the frequency range below the first STL dip (stiffness control region), the sound insulation of the structure with the clamped boundary condition (Sim-STL3) is seen to steadily decrease along with the increase of frequency from a higher value. In contrast, for the structure with the periodic boundary condition (Sim-STL4), the sound insulation values increase from zero to a peak value at point-P1, then decrease with the increasing frequency and, finally, coincide with Sim-STL3 at point-V1. This suggests that the trends of the STL curves in the stiffness control region will change with the boundary conditions, as a new peak is obtained in Sim-STL4. However, at the frequencies above the stiffness control region, trends of the STL curves are similar to each other under different boundary conditions, with the only difference being that Sim-STL4 are slightly lower than Sim-STL3. This also indicates that, for the large-scale structures widely used in engineering, performance of sound insulation is excessively overestimated by the clamped boundary condition. This further accounts for the large-size measurement samples that are commonly used in engineering practice when conducting sound insulation performance tests, and where STLs are measured through sound insulation windows. Moreover, by comparing Sim-STL3 and Exp-STL3, although the amplitudes of the measured sound insulation are higher than those of the calculated results, the curve trend and the dip feature are satisfactorily consistent with each other.
The dynamic effective mass densities and bulk moduli of model-3 and model-4 were calculated using the direct method and plotted in Figs. 4(b) and 4(c). Rhoeff-3 remain negative in the range below the first STL dip frequency (light yellow shaded area), while Rhoeff-4 remain positive in the range below point-P1 and become negative between point-P1 and point-V1. At the cut-off frequency point-V1, both Rhoeff-3 and Rhoeff-4 reach zero, while at the anti-resonant frequency point-P1, Rhoeff-4 become divergent. In other words, both Keff-3 and Keff-4 remain positive in the calculation range below 1200 Hz; however, at the point-P1, due to the anti-resonance of the frame, Keff-4 become divergent. These results suggest that the negative mass density characteristic in the range below the cut-off frequency could be changed by the introduction of a periodic boundary condition. In the frequency range above the cut-off frequency, the trend of STL curves of two models is similar to each other, as are the trends of the mass density and bulk modulus curves. In further investigation of the influence of different boundary conditions on the sound transmission characteristics, the vibration displacement distributions at point-P1 and point-V1, as shown in Fig. 3(d), suggest that at point-P1, although the plates resonate in-phase with the incident sound wave, the frame is not clamped and will therefore anti-resonate out-of-phase with the incident sound wave. Additionally, the overall weight of the frame is much larger than that of the plates, thus resulting in the intensity of anti-resonance in the frame being significantly higher than the resonance of the plates, followed by a sharp STL peak. At point-V1, the frame remains almost motionless, while the resonance of the plates reaches up to the maximum value, resulting in a STL dip (cut-off frequency). This implies that, due to changes in boundary conditions, the vibration of the frame will change, which could lead to changes in the STL curve and the effective parameters in the area of stiffness control.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, bi-layer plate-type acoustic metamaterials are proposed for wide applications, and the relationships investigated between the negative parameters and transmission (absorption) coefficients, the effective parameter properties of the asymmetric bi-layer structure with Willis coupling, and effective parameter properties in the range below the cut-off frequency. First, the dynamic effective mass densities and bulk modulus of the bi-layer thin plate structure were solved through the use of both direct and retrieval methods, and the intrinsic relationship between the sound transmission (absorption) characteristics and the effective parameters was analyzed. Second, the effective parameter properties of the asymmetric bi-layer structures were further demonstrated through experimental measurement data, and the modified effective parameters obtained by the consideration of the Willis coupling in the asymmetric passive system. Moreover, utilizing a bi-layer, square lattice plate-type unit with fixed frames surrounding the plate boundaries, the sound insulation properties under both clamped and periodic boundary conditions in the plane were evaluated and compared with the effective mass densities and bulk moduli. The results suggest that the effective negative mass density below a cut-off frequency induced from the clamped boundary condition could be altered with the introduction of periodic boundary conditions. The significance of this work lies in its potential to progress knowledge about effective parameters and has far-reaching implications for the design of negative parameter structures and large-scale sound insulation barriers.
FIG. 1. 
(a) The structure diagram (front view) of the bi-layer plate-type metamaterial unit, wherein the scarlet dotted line denotes the symmetry axis; (b) the measurement sample; (c) the experimentally measured reflections (Exp-R) and transmissions (Exp-T), and the simulated reflections (Sim-R) and transmissions (Sim-T); (d) the dynamic effective mass density (Rhoeff-Direct) and the bulk modulus (Keff-Direct) calculated by the direct method, and the real (imaginary) values of the dynamic effective mass density (Rhoeff-Retrieval-R and Rhoeff-Retrieval-I) and the bulk modulus (Keff-Retrieval-R and Keff-Retrieval-I) calculated by the retrieval method.
FIG. 2. 
(a) The sample for measurement; (b) the experimentally measured transmissions (Exp-TA and Exp-TB), reflections (Exp-RA and Exp-RB) and absorptions (Exp-AA and Exp-AB) of model-2 for different sound incidence directions the real (c) and imaginary (d) values of effective mass densities (Rhoeff-AR and Rhoeff-BR for the real values, with Rhoeff-AI and Rhoeff-BI for the imaginary values) and bulk modulus (Keff-AR and Keff-BR for the real values, and Keff-AI and Keff-BI for the imaginary values) calculated by measured transmissions and reflections, wherein the yellow shaded areas represent the negative mass density bands of both Rhoeff-AR and Rhoeff-BR for real values, and the cyan shaded areas represent the effective mass density or bulk modulus, which have opposite signs for different sound incidence directions (both the real and imaginary values).
FIG. 3. 
(a) The modified real and imaginary values of effective mass densities (Rhoeff-R for the real values, and Rhoeff-I for the imaginary values) and bulk modulus (Keff-R for the real values, but Keff-I for the imaginary values) calculated by measured transmissions and reflections, wherein the yellow shaded areas represent the negative mass density bands of Rhoeff-R; (b) the real values of relative impedance ξ (Re(Z)) and imaginary values of relative index n (Im(n)); (c) the real and imaginary values of asymmetry coefficient W; (d) the real and imaginary values of Willis coupling coefficient ψ.
FIG. 4. 
The simulated and measured STLs (a), dynamic effective mass densities (b), effective bulk modulus (c) of the bi-layer structure calculated by the direct method under different boundary conditions, and the vibration displacement distributions at the first peak (point-P1) and dip (point-V1) of Sim-STL4 (d).
