Surface-attached hydrogel coatings via C,H-insertion crosslinking for biomedical and bioanalytical applications (Review)
A novel method for the generation of surface-attached hydrogel coatings and their use in biomedical applications is discussed. This short review concentrates on surface architectures that are prepared from prepolymers carrying reactive groups suitable for crosslinking via C,H insertion reactions [C,H insertion crosslinking (CHic)]. Upon photochemical or thermal activation these groups do not only induce the crosslinking of the system, but also connect the forming gel to the surface as long as the surface itself consists of an organic material. C,H groups as the reaction partner are available in abundance at practically all types of organic surfaces such as biomaterials or polymers, rendering the technique almost universally applicable. Surface-attached gels prepared this way show unique swelling properties due to the confinement of the chains, as the obtained essentially two-dimensional gels can only swell in one dimension. This anisotropic swelling does not permit penetration of the layers by macromolecules so that the surfaces become bioinert, i.e., are strongly protein and cell repellent. It is discussed how this property can be used to control the interaction of surfaces with biological species ranging from the level of biomolecules to living cells. A combination of the CHic chemistry and microstructuring techniques opens further avenues for the study of the behavior of cells to the generation of novel bioanalytical devices.
I. SURFACE-ATTACHED HYDROGEL LAYERS
Hydrogels are well established materials for biomedical applications due to the fact that their strong water uptake closely resembles the aqueous environment of biological systems [1–3]. Much effort has been directed toward coating materials with ultrathin layers of hydrogels to control the interactions between a material's surface and the biological world contacting it. Important media, which can be in contact to the hydrogel may range from simple buffer solutions to complex analytical sera up to living cells and whole blood. Especially the latter proves frequently as quite challenging as it is a complex medium containing very strongly adsorbing proteins, multivalent ions, and many different cells [4].
One problem inherent to thin layers is the adhesion between the deposited layer and the substrate. This issue becomes even more relevant in situations in which the layers swell in their environment as it is found (and actually desired) for hydrogel coatings exposed to a biological medium. The swelling leads to a strong increase in volume of this coating which induces stress not only normal to the surface but also within the plane of the surface and may easily—at least upon extended use—cause delamination of the complete layer or parts of it. An important pathway to avoid such stability problems is to covalently anchor the hydrophilic polymer chains to the substrate surfaces. Often, self-assembled monolayers are used to this extent [5–10]. Examples of such anchor chemistries are silanes, thiols (or disulfides), and phosphonates, which bind to reactive groups present on glass/silicon, gold, aluminum, and titanium surfaces, respectively. Deposition of the anchor layer is followed either by chemisorption of polymer chains with appropriate reactive groups or by growth of polymer brushes. Hence, following such an approach only monomolecular layers can be attached and the layers are intrinsically fragile as large polymer molecules are linked to the surface by only one chemical bond. An alternative approach uses polymer networks covalently bound to the substrate surfaces. Here, as many covalent bonds are established the stability of the layer is greatly enhanced. A novel approach to generate such structures has been published recently [11–18]. It is built on linear polymers which carry reactive groups through which they can be bound to each other after a thermal or photochemical activation leading eventually to crosslinking of the whole layer. Simultaneously to crosslinking the forming networks bind to the surface [19–26]. This strategy is based on C,H insertion reactions and depicted schematically in Fig. 1.
In brief, the respective polymers are in a first step coated onto the substrate using standard coating techniques such as spin or dip coating, spraying, or doctor blading. The crosslinker groups within the films are then excited and form reactive intermediates such as ketyl biradicals [12], nitrenes [11,13], or carbenes [14–17]. These react with neighboring C,H groups. Formally, the reaction can be seen as a C,H insertion and the term “C,H insertion crosslinking” (CHic) is used to describe it. Based on these findings other groups have reported similar systems and strategies [19–31] among which are also some that use biomolecules with such groups to generate biofunctionalized surfaces [32–34]. The major advantage of this strategy is the fact that the reaction partner required for the crosslinker moiety is simply a C-H unit. The latter, however, are ubiquitously available in the material itself and—more importantly—they are also present on a substrate if this substrate is a polymer or a biomaterial itself. Due to the nature of the insertion reaction, both crosslinking and surface attachment occur at the same time. When other molecules, e.g., biomolecules such as DNA or proteins, are present during the activation step, these molecules will become incorporated into the forming network as well. For many other systems such as metallic or other inorganic surfaces, C,H groups can be generated on the surface through the binding of small molecules (deposition of a “primer”) or in other words the formation of self-assembled monolayers [35,36]. This will allow the covalent attachment of the forming network to the surface in a passive way. However, it is often advantageous to perform this binding process in an active way and to self-assemble molecules on the surfaces, which carry reactive groups themselves [20].
A frequently used reactive group in this regard is the benzophenone unit. Benzophenone groups are attractive because they can be easily synthesized and upon light induced activation can be excited to a biradicaloid triplet state, which has a very long lifetime [33–38]. Despite the relatively unspecific type of reaction, it has gained considerable interest for the modification and labeling of biomolecules and more specifically of hydrophobic binding sites [39–41]. It can be in a very simple way incorporated into polymers via free radical copolymerization with comonomers that form water soluble polymers. A very commonly used monomer in this respect is N,N-dimethyl acrylamide. The corresponding polymer is shown in Fig. 2(a). Figure 2(b) summarizes the crosslinking mechanism. The oxygen centered radical abstracts a hydrogen from a nearby aliphatic C,H-group leaving behind a radical at the carbon of this group. This radical may eventually recombine with the radical at the previous carbon of the benzophenone. If the two reactants originate from different chains, a crosslink is formed. If the reaction occurs with a C,H from the substrate, the polymer is linked to the substrate and eventually a surface-attached network is generated. Typical crosslinker contents range from 0.5 to 10 mol. %. At higher crosslinker concentration, the water swellability of the forming hydrogels is strongly attenuated due to the hydrophobic nature of the crosslinker units. At very low concentrations, the resulting hydrogels become mechanically fragile. Other possible crosslinkers are shown in Fig. 2(c) together with their reactive species formed after thermal or photochemical activation. Azides form nitrenes and diazo carbonyls or carboxyls form a carbene upon the loss of nitrogen. Table I summarizes the CHic systems published so far, details on the various reaction pathways are provided in the literature [11–17].
The crosslinking reaction can be studied by monitoring the decomposition of the reactive unit via UV or IR spectroscopies and by measuring the gel content of the formed layer. The prior two parameters describe the decomposition behavior of the active groups. The latter describes how much of the copolymer becomes incorporated into the hydrogels. It is given by the layer thickness after crosslinking and rigorous extraction compared to the initial layer thickness after film deposition. Complete conversion yields a gel content of unity. Any chains not incorporated into the forming network are extracted and lead to a reduction of the gel content of the final coating. Typically, more than 80% of the deposited material is incorporated into the resulting surface-attached network layer and very often gel contents near 100% are found for a wide range of initial layer thicknesses. Most cases have shown that network formation follows crosslinker decomposition in a closely related manner; however, some deviations were also found. A theoretical study allowed us to successfully explain these deviations using an adopted percolation model [42]. According to this model, a certain critical conversion of the reactive groups is required to reach the gel point and form a hydrogel. However, after reaching of the percolation point, also branched high molecular weight material become so strongly entangled in the infinite cluster formed that they can no longer be extracted. This way gel formation is extremely rapid. It should be noted that thermally induced crosslinking occurs homogenously throughout the film. Light induced photoreactions, however, depend also on the distribution of the light intensity within the polymer film [36].
Surface attached hydrogel layers were extensively studied with regard to their swelling behavior in water using ellipsometry [12]. These layers can only swell perpendicular to the surface because the chemical bonds between the chains of the network and the substrate prevent any lateral expansion. This confined geometry leads to a strongly decreased degree of swelling of the layers compared to chemically identical free networks which are not linked to a surface. Confinement reduced the volumetric swelling of the layer material but also leads to anisotropic linear swelling in the direction normal to the surface: The chains are quite strongly stretched in this direction.
This stretching reduces the conformational freedom of the chains of the network or hydrogel. As a consequence, the penetration of further macromolecules into this layer is strongly hindered for entropic reasons. This has been shown using network layers which carried active ester groups and exposed these layers to polyethylene oxides with amino endgroups [7]. Only very short chain length amines were able to penetrate into the layer and get attached there. Longer chains became only attached to the very periphery of the network layers even if they were still small enough for the given mesh size of the network.
II. BIOINERT SURFACES THROUGH ULTRATHIN HYDROGEL COATINGS
Based on these findings, the interaction between strongly swollen hydrogel layers and proteins has been studied [43–47]. As mentioned earlier, proteins would have to penetrate into these layers in order to adsorb on these surfaces. In a comparative study, we have used crosslinked poly-dimethyl acrylamide (PDMAA)‐co-methacryloyloxy benzophenone (MABP) as shown in Fig. 3(a). These layers swell by a factor of 3–4 when exposed to water. In a number of experiments, layers of this polymer were exposed to a buffered solutions of typical blood proteins and monitored by surface plasmon spectroscopy (SPR) [48,49]. The resulting curves are plotted in Fig. 3 together with the results of control experiments using a layer prepared from medical-grade polyurethane (PU) which does not swell in water. Shown is the reflectivity R in a kinetic SPR experiment in which R is recorded at an angle just below the resonance angle of the surface plasmon as a function of exposure time to the protein solution. An overall increase in the reflectivity, especially after returning to the original buffer solution, denotes protein adsorption. Such an increase is only found for the reference sample (PU). When the surface is coated with PDMAA, however, the signal increased only—if at all—very slightly upon exposure to the protein solution as shown in Fig. 3(b). This small increase might indicate some weakly adsorbing material or more likely be due to a small change in the refractive index of the solution flushed into the cell. However, upon washing the reflectivity returned to the original value, indicating that no protein had permanently adsorbed and the PDMAA layer remained clean over the time frame of the experiment. A further comparison of a homologous series of acrylamide layers of varying polarity where the length of the alkyl side chain in the substituent was varied has shown that the swelling behavior is governing the protein adsorption behavior in such systems. Surface-attached neutral hydrogel layers which exhibited a strong swelling behavior in the contacting buffer medium showed no protein adsorption, while layers which were less strongly swollen exhibited reduced protein repellency. This protein repellency behavior was explained using a model called “entropic shielding” where in systems which show no enthalphic interactions between the polymer and the protein, penetration of the layer by the protein is prevented as the entropy of mixing in such a system is rather small while due to the strong stretching of the chains there is a strong loss of conformational entropy, rendering the adsorption of proteins energetically unfavorable. When very large incoming molecules are studied, additional size exclusion effects are expected which will further reduce the penetration of the layers by such molecules.
Further studies have shown that the protein repellent character of these layers translates directly into a cell repellent character [35–37]. Cells interact with artificial surfaces through proteins. They secrete these proteins onto the surface to generate a very controlled environment and thus create their only little world (“terraforming behavior”). Figure 4 shows an example in which a PU surface is once more exposed to human fibroblasts. Several rectangular spots on this surface were coated with a PDMAA hydrogel layer. The fibroblasts quickly cover the entire PU surface but stay away from the hydrogel patches even after the formation of a densely packed cell layer. Further studies have shown that the hydrogel patches remained cell free even after six month of continued cell cultivation [43].
In another study, the bioinert properties of these layers were used as a background for the attachment of cells to surfaces via specific interactions [50–52]. In these examples, some areas on the surface were covered with hydrogels carrying the peptide cell-recognition motif GRGDS, while other areas were only covered by the hydrogel. The samples were generated by photolithography using PDMAA and GRGDS-labeled PDMAA (Ref [43]) for the generation of the repellent and attractive areas, respectively. Cells seeded onto these surfaces attach specifically to the areas providing the GRGDS motifs and stay away from the hydrogel.
Given the fact that these hydrogel coatings are very effectively repelling blood proteins we went one step further and exposed such layers to whole blood [45]. Once more, layers of medical polyurethane served as reference samples. Fluorescence staining was used to visualize adsorbed blood cells on surfaces. Such cells might lead to the formation of a thrombus if such processes occur on a blood contacting implant material. Figure 5 shows two characteristic results from a PDMAA and PU layer after a few minutes of blood exposure. A green fluorescence caused by adsorbed blood cells is only found on the PU sample, and the hydrogel surface appears black which again demonstrates that the strong swelling reduces protein and cell attachment very efficiently.
III. DIRECTING CELLS ON 3D MICROSTRUCTURED SURFACES
In addition to the surface chemistry, the surface topography has also a strong influence on the behavior of cells on surfaces, and in many cases, the mechanical properties are also important in this regard [53–56]. The CHic-based deposition techniques for the generation of the surface-attached polymer networks is compatible with many of the techniques of surface microstructuring. Some examples for the combination with photolithography have already been mentioned earlier. Techniques such as hot embossing or nanoimprinting, however, advance microstructuring efforts into the third dimension and lead to surface relief structures with dimensions ranging from nanometers to micrometers. It has been shown before [13] that the hot embossed microstructures maintain their structures even at elevated temperatures if they are crosslinked by CHic chemistries after generation.
Such procedures have been used to study the mechanical activity of cardiomyocytes [57]. This activity is governed by a process called excitation–contraction coupling. In short, changes in the calcium concentration within a cell lead to the activation of contractile proteins which then cause cell contraction. A simultaneous investigation of the calcium concentration and the mechanical activity of the cell allowed to study the correlation of these parameters. The contractile activity of the cells was monitored using a micropillar array prepared by hot embossing and CHic crosslinking of poly-n-butylacrylate carrying 4% of benzophenone monomers. These yield pillars that are soft enough so that cardiomyocytes spanned between two pillars can deflect the pillars by a few micrometers. This deformation can be monitored to characterize the mechanical activity of the cells, which can then be correlated to the results of a simultaneous detection of calcium transients by confocal fluorescence microscopy which follows the fluorescence of a calcium sensitive dye. This combination can also be used to study the influence of drugs on cell contraction.
In further studies, similar surface architectures generated by CHic were used to study the behavior of bone cancer cells on such surfaces [58]. A combination of microstructuring and surface modification led to situations in which the cells penetrated the microstructures and even cell nuclei wrapped around the posts of these micropillar arrays.
IV. HYDROGEL COATINGS AS CARRIER FOR BIOANALYTICAL PROBES
The strong swelling and the bioinert nature of these gels can also be used to explore specific interactions between bio(macro)molecules and the surfaces of chiplike bioanalytical devices. A very interesting architecture in this context is the biochip format which shrinks bioanalytical laboratories onto a small chip or slide (“lab-on-chip” or “lab-on-disk” formats) [59–61].
Conventional chip formats [62,63] are generated by depositing probe molecules on small spots in an array of these spots. The chips are then incubated with an analyte solution and molecules which are complementary to the surface bound probes will be attached to the respective spot on the surface. Fluorescence labeling techniques allow then for a read-out of the binding events and will, hence, reveal the analyte molecules which were present in the analyte solution. This general format is suitable for the analysis of nucleic acids by analyzing hybridization events as well as for proteins, e.g., in immunoassay formats. The respective probe or capture molecules are often deposited by printing techniques and the covalent link to the surface is established through complementary reactive groups on the molecules and the surface [64–68].
However, these strictly two-dimensional architectures often lack sufficient sensitivity, especially if very low concentrations need to be detected. Also, many of the general coupling techniques lack the reproducibility needed to generate biochips reliable enough for routine analytical tasks. A key problem is here that the formation of a self-assembled layer can be followed qualitatively very easily; however, a quantification of the graft density of molecules contained in monomolecular layers is rather difficult.
These issues can be addressed by using surface-attached hydrogels prepared via the CHic method as carrier for the bioprobes [69–72]. Figure 6 shows an example of such a chip design. The capture molecules (here proteins) are printed together with the photoreactive polymers from a buffered solution. After drying, the chips are illuminated at 365 nm to crosslink the polymer and anchor it to the PMMA substrate. At the same time, the capture molecules are also bound to the gel. All in all only one chemical step is needed to generate the microarray on the chip.
The high sensitivity of such chips has been demonstrated in a study that used bovine serum albumin (BSA) and β_{2}-microglobulin as model compounds [61,63]. The general protein-repellency of the gel allowed only for specific interactions between the capture molecules and analytes and lead to excellent signal-to-noise or more precisely signal to background ratios. Furthermore, simple variations during the printing process like changing the number of printed drops allow for a variation of the surface concentration of the capture molecules such that a very large range of analyte concentrations can be covered.
In a second example based on hydrogel anchored nucleic acid probes, the nucleic acid sequence based assay (NASBA) amplification techniques has been combined with chip based analysis [73]. The combination of multiplex reverse transcription and universal NASBA amplification up to 14 different messenger RNA and micro RNA (miRNA) sequences were successfully amplified and detected in parallel. A comparison to standard multiplex NASBA assays has shown that the hydrogel carrier approach strongly enhanced the multiplex capacity of NASBA-based amplification reactions. The results also suggest that the simultaneous assaying of different RNA classes might make it possible to study the miRNA-based regulation of gene expression or for RNA-based tumor diagnostics.
In an effort to further increase the sensitivity of hydrogel-based biochip formats, we also have explored ways to increase the specific surface of the spots on the chip by performing the crosslinking reaction in a frozen polymer solution (cryogel). Cryogels are frequently used in biomedical and bioanalytical applications due to their straight forward preparation and the resulting high surface areas [74–77]. A novel procedure [64,78] is shown in Fig. 7(a): In order to generate arrays, a photolithographic approach has been used rather than printing techniques. Both, DNA and protein chips/devices with outstanding sensitivities could be prepared.
V. DISCUSSION
At first view, it may seem to be a disadvantage that the crosslinking reaction itself is rather unspecific in that it occurs via rather reactive species such as carbenes or radicals which react with practically any C,H group in the vicinity. However, as it is commonly the case, there are two sides of the coin. Selectivity is on one side, universality on the other. The CHic reaction is very versatile, because it is universally applicable. Practically, all polymeric systems can be crosslinked via this technique (as long as the presence of a high concentration of low molecular weight compounds is excluded, of course). When viewing this reaction, several points need to be considered.
First, the reactions are typically performed in the dry and glassy state. In these cases, diffusion is painstakingly slow and it is difficult for two different specific reaction partners [79–81] to come close enough to each other for a reaction, especially if the concentration of the crosslinker is not extremely high [82,83]. C,H groups, however, are usually available in large abundance and always some of them will be in close vicinity of one of the crosslinking units. This enables fast and efficient crosslinking, even in a glass or a highly viscous system. The performance of crosslinking in the glassy state, however, is advantageous for the crosslinking of coatings deposited on arbitrary shaped surfaces. If surfaces are coated with a liquid as it is commonly required for the performance of conventional crosslinking reactions, there is inherently the danger that this liquid will start to flow during the processing, rendering a homogeneous coating of the surfaces difficult. Additionally, performing of CHic reactions allows for a complete consumption of the reactive groups as shown by UV/Vis and/or FTIR [11,14,15]. No or only few groups remain in the layer which avoids ageing problems commonly encountered in other systems [84–86].
Second, functionalization of the layers can be easily achieved either by copolymerization or by simply mixing the desired functional groups into the polymer. In the latter case, for example, proteins, dyes, and DNA can be easily incorporated into the film [46,61–65] (provided that no detrimental phase separation occurs). During the CHic reaction, the desired molecules will also be attacked by the reactive species and be covalently attached to the forming surface-attached network. Although it cannot be excluded that the insertion reaction does not react with an active part of the biomolecule such as the binding pocket of an enzyme or epitope of an antibody, the insertion reaction, in most cases bind to non-active parts of the molecules. For example, it does not attack aromatic rings such as those present in dyes or the bases of DNA, where an attack of the sugar backbone is thus more likely. For enzymes, it is more probable that the periphery of the protein is attacked rather than the active center. In all these cases, we saw no differences between layers prepared through this simple and quick way compared to systems generated through a multistep pathway.
Third, the reaction is very robust. Ketyl radicals, nitrenes and carbenes, once formed in the glassy layers, react with neighboring C,H units largely irrespective of the details of the reaction conditions. In contrast to this, many other surface modification techniques, which are based, for example, on condensation reactions, are rather sensitive to the environment in which the reaction is performed and parameters such as the humidity or oxygen often need to be controlled rather rigorously. Such systems often lack the robustness needed for large scale device fabrication. CHic reactions are more tolerant in this regard.
Fourth, the CHic method is directly suited for the modification of typically rather inert polymeric surfaces. Ketyl radicals, nitrenes and carbenes do not distinguish between C,H groups from different polymers and crosslinking a layer located on a polymer substrate directly leads practically inevitably to surface attachment. This allows the direct modification, even of polymers containing intrinsically no reactive groups such as poly(styrene) or poly(ethylene) without the need of a prior surface activation [29].
VI. CONCLUSIONS
CHic is a powerful strategy to generate surface-attached polymer networks, in general, and surface-attached hydrogel coatings, in particular, in the context of biomedical applications. It is a simple, yet very robust technique and can be performed under a variety of conditions, even in the presence of water or air in contrast to many of the conventional processes so far. Through printing and brief UV-exposure, complex surface architectures can be generated in a one-step procedure, even with high spatial resolution. The CHic process is a simple and versatile tool to obtain tailor-made biointerfaces, which is starting to find significant interest in the field of biomedical sciences and device development and a series of applications in this direction ranging from implantable materials to novel bioanalytical devices is currently being developed.
Table I. 
Monomers used in CHic systems and their most important characteristics.
Table I. -body
Structure of monomer	Type	Activation
	Aromatic carbonyl	254 nm
365 nm
	Sulfonyl azide	254 nm
>120 °C
	Diazo carboxyl	254 nm
365 nm
>120 °C
	Diazo carboxyl	254 nm
>120 °C
	Diazo carboxyl	254 nm
>120 °C
Fig. 1. 
Schematic description of the C,H insertion crosslinking for the generation of surface attached polymer networks on polymeric supports.
Fig. 2. 
(a) Chemical structure of poly(dimethyl acrylamide)-co-MABP. (b) Mechanism of the C,H insertion reaction of benzophenone containing polymers and (c) further groups for CHic and their excited species.
Fig. 3. 
Kinetics of the adsorption of the blood plasma proteins von Willebrand factor, collagen, Fn, and Fg on surface attached hydrogel (PDMAAm) (b) and on medical grade PU as a reference (a). Data were obtained from SPR measurements. Reprinted with permission from Pandiyarajan et_al, Macromol. Biosci. 13, 873 (2013). Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.
Fig. 4. 
Mouse fibroblasts (L929) on polyurethane surfaces decorated with patches (100 × 200 μm^{2}) of surface attached PDMAA-based hydrogels. The cells stay away from the hydrogel covered areas and only settle and proliferate on the PU surface.
Fig. 5. 
Fluorescence images recorded from (a) PU and (b) PDMAA surfaces after 2 min of exposure to whole blood (flow rate: 8 l/min). Only the PU sample shows green fluorescence indicating the adsorption of blood cells. Experimental details are provided in Ref [45].
Fig. 6. 
(a) Fluorescence image of an antibody microarray based on surface-attached hydrogels generated from poly(N,N-dimethacrylamide) containing 1 mol. % benzophenone groups. The samples were printed with varying antibody concentrations. (b) Schematic depiction of a cut-out of the structure of such a surface-attached polymer network carrying varying concentrations of the antibody probe molecules. (c) Intensities of the obtained fluorescence read-out signals after incubation with 100 nM labeled BSA. Reproduced with permission from Moschallski et_al, Anal. Chim. Acta 671, 92 (2010). Copyright 2013, Elsevier B.V. Additional experimental details can be found in Ref [71].
Fig. 7. 
Generation of functional surface-attached cryogel microstructures through a light-induced CHic process performed at low temperature: (a) schematic depiction of the generation process, (b) image of an array of three-dimensional microstructures with a height of approximately 340 μm generated from a surface-attached cryogel consisting of poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) generated as described earlier, and (c) a high resolution image of one of the cylinders showing the pore structure of the cylinders. Reprinted with permission from Zinggeler et_al, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 12165 (2017). Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.
