Study on atmospheric pressure glow discharge based on AC-DC coupled electric field
Based on the idea of increasing the number of initial electrons by changing the structures of the cathode, a method of generating the glow discharge plasma in the DC electric field by using the three-potential electrode structure is proposed. When the cathode takes the form of a spiral-contact electrode, a coupled electrode structure is designed. With this structure, the pre-discharge spiral-contact electrode provides a moderate number of seed electrons for the DC electric field. Moreover, the special electric field distribution of the coupled electrode structure can effectively suppress the occurrence of filamentary discharge and make possible the 8 mm-wide DC glow discharge under atmospheric pressure. The plasma generated in the DC field shows a feature of directional motion, promising great perspective in its application in surface treatment and other fields.
I. INTRODUCTION
Atmospheric pressure glow discharge plasma enjoys a promisingly wide range of applications in air purification, surface modification of materials, disinfection and sterilization, and so on [1–4]. In 1988, Japanese professor Kanazawa. S used an inert gas to make it easier to generate atmospheric pressure glow discharge plasma [5]. Pinaev, Khataee, and others also realized glow discharge with an inert gas [6,7]. However, this method requires the use of relatively expensive inert gases; thus, it is difficult to apply widely. It is still hot and difficult to study glow discharge under atmospheric pressure [8–10]. As the air is highly insulated and the electric field required for the discharge is relatively high, it is likely to lead to filamentary discharge [11–13]. If dielectric is used as the barrier, with the excitation of a high frequency AC pulse power and with small clearance, filamentary discharges can be avoided to a certain extent [9,11,12]. In our early study, based on the concept of electric field design, we constructed a variety of electrode structures with dielectric as the barrier, such as the Hamburg electrode, special uneven electrode, and so on. The resulting non-uniform electric field distribution thwarts the development of electron avalanche, controls the number of plasma generated, and realizes APGD [14–19]. Nevertheless, in these studies, the generated plasma does not have the characteristics of transporting in a certain direction [20–23].
DC glow discharge is an effective method to obtain plasma moving in a certain direction [24,25]. As we all know, the difficulties in DC discharge are that we cannot use dielectric as the barrier to suppress discharge and that the number of secondary electrons released is difficult to control, so that the key issue is how to avoid filamentary discharge [26–32]. Some scholars have made their attempts in this regard. For example, in 2014, Arkhipenko et_al explored the possibility of a glow discharge in a mixture of helium and air [33]. In 2015, Xu and Zhong looked at the characteristics of glow discharge between air and water with microinjection of argon gas [34]. In 2017, Grigorian et_al studied the characteristics of DC glow discharge in neon [35]. However, these studies require the use of rare gases, and thus in essence, the resulting discharge is not really glow discharge in the air. In addition, Staack explored the characteristics of APGD with the column-plate electrode structure [36], and Li et_al achieved atmospheric direct current corona glow discharge with the needle-to-cylinder electrode structure [37]. In such studies, due to the presence of ballast resistance, the inter-pole voltage is varied during the discharge process, and the resulting discharge is not direct current discharge. In this extremely asymmetric electrode structure, the local DC discharge generated the plasma, but its uniformity is poor, and its density is low.
In the preliminary study, we used a carbon fiber contact electrode structure to achieve uniform glow discharge under atmospheric pressure [14,17]. By combining theory with experiment, this study proposes a DC discharge with a discharging spiral-contact electrode being the cathode. In other words, pre-discharge of the spiral-contact electrode provides seed electrons and coupled electrode structure forms a special transverse-longitudinal electrical field distribution, thus the formation of a stable DC glow discharge.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The experimental system consists of four parts: AC power supply, DC power supply, measurement system, and discharging electrode, as shown in Fig. 1. The AC power supply has a high voltage, with a frequency of 20 kHz, and the output voltage ranges between 0 and 10 kV in the sine wave. The DC power supply is constant, with an amplitude ranging between 2 and 10 kV. The measurement system mainly includes the Tektronix high voltage probe P6015A to measure the voltage between the electrodes, a 100 Ω resistor to measure the discharge current, and the Tektronix digital oscilloscope TDS1012B-SC to display the voltage and the current signals. On the flank of the electrode, there is a Canon digital camera EOS7D with macro lens to photograph the discharge images. This experiment was carried out in an indoor atmospheric air environment. The detailed structure of the discharge electrode is shown in Fig. 2.
In order to obtain a more uniform development trend of electron avalanche, we use the pre-discharge spiral-contact electrode as the cathode of the DC electric field, and exposed metal as the anode, dubbing it co-ground potential spiral-contact electrode coupled anode (referred to as “coupled electrode”). Here, the spiral-contact electrode includes an interior electrode, insulating layer, and exterior electrode. The interior electrode is a metallic material with a diameter of 0.5 mm. The insulating material is PTFE, and its thickness is 0.02 mm. The exterior electrode is a cluster of carbon fiber bundles, with a mono-filament diameter of 7 μm and a winding spacing of 2 mm. The electrode is connected with the ground potential of the AC power supply and the negative pole of the DC power supply. The anode is a rod-shaped exposed metal with a diameter of 1 mm. The spacing (d) between the spiral-contact electrode and the anode is 2 mm; and the total length (L) is 1.5 mm. For the convenience of discussion, this paper calls the area between the spiral-contact electrode and the anode as the DC discharge area.
III. SYNERGISTIC EFFECT OF AC-DC COUPLED ELECTRIC FIELD
In the atmospheric glow discharge, the voltage applied to the electrode determines the electric field distribution between the electrodes and then determines the discharge morphology. Thus, it is important to understand the distribution characteristics of electric field for the uniform discharge [15,30]. Under the guidance of the electrostatic field theory and via the use of Ansoft Maxwell and MATLAB software, this chapter begins by analyzing the electric field's characteristics of coupled electrode structure.
A. The distribution characteristics of AC-DC coupled electric field
The electric field distribution of the coupled electrode structure is shown in Fig. 3, where the amplitude of the AC voltage is 1.8 kV and that of the DC voltage is 3 kV. When the AC voltage amplitude reaches +1.8 kV [Fig. 3(a)], a strong electric field (6 × 10^{6} V/m) will surround the carbon fiber. Moreover, the electric field line of the spiral-contact electrode's section shows that the electric field intensity at each point in the region between the two coils is affected by the electric field lines projecting to all directions from the adjacent carbon fiber coil, yielding a result where multi-directional electric field intensities overlap with each other. It can be predicted that the spiral-contact electrode, under the influence of a strong electric field, can form a uniform pre-discharge. In addition, it can be seen that the intensity of the electric field in the DC discharge region is fluctuating steadily with the lowest field intensity being 1.6 × 10^{6} V/m. In the case where the pre-discharge generates seed electrons, there is a possibility that a discharge will follow suit. It is shown that when the AC voltage is −1.8 kV [Fig. 3(b)], the electric field in the DC discharge region is further enhanced due to the further expansion of the potential difference between the anode and the internal electrode, with its lowest field intensity being 3 × 10^{6} V/m. The direction of the electric field vector is from the insulating layer to the anode, which causes the electron to be sucked directly into the DC discharge area by the electric field force. The above changes further promote the occurrence of a DC discharge.
Since the output of the AC power source varies sinusoidally between −1.8 and +1.8 kV, a time-varying electric field is formed in the DC region.
Get the electric field in the time and space on the distribution by the data fitting method in MATLAB. The data obtained by Ansoft Maxwell simulation is (d_{i},t_{j},E_{i,j})(i,j=1,2,…,n), and the function f(d,t,θ) is established to minimize the deviation between the value of the function at point (d,t) and the observed data and obtain the minimum function f(d,t,θ̂). The function satisfies the following formula, where θ is the parameter to be determined and θ̂ is the best parameter determined by the least squares method:
By connecting the anode and dot on the surface of carbon fiber where the voltage equals the average electric field voltage, we use the fluctuation of this line to represent the fluctuation of the whole electric field. When R^{2} approaches to 1, the trend of the electric field in time and space is shown in Fig. 4.
It can be seen from Fig. 4(a) that the electric field intensity between the spiral-contact electrode and the anode follows the pattern of falling and then rising within one cycle of the AC voltage. This makes it possible that by reducing the intensity of electric field, we can suppress the filamentary discharge from where the number of the initial electrons from pre-discharging hit a fairly great number. In the vicinity of the anode, the field intensity is once again improved so that the development of electron avalanche is again promoted. It is worth noting that the field intensity near the anode should not be over-increased, or it is likely that the number of avalanched electron will be too large so as to cause filamentary discharge. In Fig. 4(b), the auxiliary lines of w, p, and q can represent the time-varying characteristics of the three fields near the spiral-contact electrode, the DC discharge region, and the anode. It can be seen that the electric field intensity in the negative half cycle of the AC voltage is higher than in the positive half cycle, which prompts the development of collision ionization in the negative half cycle, promoting the generation of a thorough glow discharge.
In summary, due to the time-varying characteristics of the electric field of the coupled electrode structure, the magnitude of the electric field intensity and the number of seed electrons in the DC discharge region are keys to the formation of a large-area thorough discharge. When the AC and DC voltage work in synergy, providing enough seed electrons can incite the occurrence of discharge, thus breaking the limits of needing a large number of secondary electrons to maintain glow discharge. The time-varying characteristics of the electric field in the space can promote the balanced development of the electric avalanche and provide a theoretical basis for the formation of glow discharge.
B. Analysis of electron avalanche in DC electric field
The core of the coupled electrode structure is to utilize the discharging spiral-contact electrode to provide seed electrons, so as to realize large-area glow discharge. The electric field intensity in the DC discharge area is the key to the formation of the thorough discharge, which is closely related to the DC voltage U (1.5–5 kV) and the spacing d (1–10 mm). In order to further analyze the discharge characteristics of the electrode structure, first, the electric field intensities at different voltages and spacings are obtained by simulation, and the specific values of the field strength at each position on the straight line T in Fig. 5(a) are obtained and plotted the curve k. on Fig. 5(b) to obtain. Second, using the data fitting method in MATLAB, we can get the concrete function after fitting, as shown in the curve g in Fig. 5(b). The specific formula is shown as follows:
If only considering the collision ionization process, in the space of the uneven electric field, you can calculate the number of electrons on the anode when DC voltage U and spacing d vary, and use it as an indicator to determine the type of discharge formed, the process is as follows [38]:
Ne_{d} represents the number of electrons reaching the anode, n_{0} represents the initial number of electrons, α represents the ionization coefficient, and η represents the adhesion coefficient. α and η are always changing under the non-uniform electric field [39–43]. Under atmospheric pressure (pressure is p), the correlation function is expressed as follows:
The plasma generated from the discharge of the spiral-contact electrode provides seed electrons for the DC electric field. Through the calculation of the above-mentioned development of electron avalanche, the number of anode electrons is worked out. When the result is 10^{9}–10^{12} cm^{−3} [44], it is considered that the discharge conforms to the DC glow discharge characteristic. The three-dimensional relationship between the rationally numbered electrons, voltage U, and the spacing d is figured out through MATLAB programming, as shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that when the spacing is 2 mm, the reasonable dc voltage level is 2.6–3.4 kV. With the increase of spacing, the number of electrons reaching the anode decreases gradually, and we must increase the voltage to maintain a proper level of discharge in the space. However, electron avalanche develops rapidly in the vicinity of the anode plate, so precise control on the voltage is demanded; otherwise, it is easy to convert into filamentary discharge. In actual discharge, however, it is difficult to operate. Specifically, if the appropriate voltage is made possible by appropriate spacing, in terms of discharge pattern, the field intensity around the spiral-contact electrode will be slightly larger, inciting the occurrence of collision ionization; as the spacing widens to a certain value, the field intensity will weaken, effectively suppressing the over-development of electron avalanche; when it reaches the anode, the field intensity is slightly strengthened again to promote the occurrence of discharge, thus forming a discharge throughout the entire space. This creates a theoretical condition for the formation of DC glow discharges in the air.
IV. GENERATION OF GLOW DISCHARGE PLASMA
The simulation results show that the coupled electrode structure serves as a catalyst for the generation of glow discharge plasma under the DC electric field. The discharge characteristics of this electrode are further investigated by experiments.
A. Discharge phenomenon and discharge characteristics
When the spacing d is 2 mm, the discharge image taken with an exposure time of 100 μs and the light intensity distribution are shown in Fig. 7. If only AC voltage (amplitude 1.8 kV) is applied, a stable pre-discharge will be observed on the spiral-contact electrode, taking the full-package three-dimensional form, as shown in Fig. 7(a). This provides a large amount of initial electrons for the DC electric field. When the AC and DC voltage (amplitude 3 kV) is applied synchronously, the discharge phenomenon is shown in Fig. 7(b). It can be seen that under the synergistic effect of AC and DC voltage, a stable light blue thorough glow discharge is formed in the DC discharge region. This indicates that the existence of anode leads to the steady development of the electron avalanche in the DC discharge region, and finally leads to a stable discharge. Using the method of image light intensity identification, it helps us to judge the shape of discharge [45]. Using the MATLAB image processing method, the light intensity distribution from the spiral-contact electrode to the anode is obtained and displayed in straight line g, as shown in Fig. 8(c). It can be seen that from left to right, cathode glow, Faraday dark area, positive column area, and anode glow appeared sequentially. The cathode glow, immersed with the intensity of light from the spiral-contact electrode itself, strengthens the light intensity of the cathode glow area. These characteristic areas are typical of dc glow discharge, which proves that the atmospheric pressure glow discharge is formed in the coupled electrode structure.
Figure 8 shows the voltage and current waveform before and after AC/DC co-discharging. If only the 1.8 kV AC voltage applied [Fig. 9(a)], the spiral-contact electrode itself will form a stable uniform discharge, and the current waveform shows that the negative half cycle discharge is more intense than the positive half cycle discharge. This is because dielectric barrier is employed on one side of the spiral-contact electrode; so when the direction of the voltage is reversed, electrons accumulated on the insulating layer are all released as seed electrons, accelerating the negative half-cycle discharge process. As the changes in the AC electric field produces a mild electric field in the space, a faint current can be observed. When a DC voltage of 3 kV is applied together with the AC voltage (1.8 kV) mentioned earlier, the density of the current discharged from the spiral-contact electrode increases, which means that the discharge is increasing in its intensity. The significantly increasing pulse density and amplitude of DC current demonstrates that a stable discharge is present in the DC discharge area all the time. The position generating the pulse is consistent with the AC discharge time, proving that the previous discharge of the spiral-contact electrode does indeed provide seed electrons for the DC discharge region. In the negative half of the AC voltage, the DC discharge scale becomes larger, which corresponds to the previous analysis of the electric field. We also found that when the DC voltage remains unchanged, a breakdown electric arc was formed immediately upon cutting off the AC voltage. This shows that the AC/DC voltage works in synergy, the plasma generated from the pre-discharge at the spiral-contact electrode shields the potential of the electrode so that on its surface, the electric field is evenly distributed and that the amount of secondary electrons is effectively controlled, thereby inhibiting the conversion of filamentary discharge. Therefore, the coupled electrode structure can make possible the atmospheric pressure glow discharge in the direct current electric field, and the whole discharge process coincides with the previous calculation and simulation.
The I-V curve of the discharge is shown in Fig. 9. Three different curves (a, b, c) represent changes of the DC voltage and DC discharge current in different AC voltages. When the AC voltage is 0 (curve a), the coupled electrode structure in the DC electric field gives birth to corona discharge, with a small current value; when the voltage reaches 3.1 kV, a breakdown appears; when the AC voltage is 1.5 kV (curve b), the spiral-contact electrode produces a relatively weak pre-discharge; as the DC voltage increases, the DC discharge area begins to discharge and apparently, its current is greater than the corona current and is in line with the glow discharge current level. When the DC voltage reaches 3.3 kV, the breakdown occurs, reflecting the uniform discharge in the space with enhanced stability. When the AC voltage is further increased to an even higher value, like 1.8 kV (curve c), the spiral-contact electrode produced a relatively strong pre-discharge, and the DC discharge current value increased significantly, thus further delaying the breakdown voltage. It can be seen that the pattern of the pre-discharge at the spiral-contact electrode has a great influence on the number of seed electrons and on the DC discharge stability, which is basically consistent with the previous model calculation.
Using the MATLAB image processing method, the entire shape of the discharge intensity was analyzed, and the three dimensional light intensity distribution is shown in Fig. 10. It shows that the characteristic area is formed in the whole electrode space, the discharge intensity is stronger, and the discharge area is larger, which cannot be achieved by the traditional and extremely asymmetric electrode structure. To a certain extent, the density and temperature of the plasma produced by the discharge of the electrode structure have obvious advantages. By this method, we can deeply explore the microscopic characteristics of DC glow discharge in air.
B. The formation of large-area glow discharge
In the experiment, we made various combinations with spiral-contact electrodes and anodes, with all kinds of combinations producing relatively large-area glow discharge. When d = 3 mm and the spiral-contact electrode is surrounded by three anodes, the coupled electrode structure, electric field distribution, and discharge phenomenon are shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen from Fig. 11(b) that as the size of DC field increases, the electric field intensity near the anode decreases, which bodes well for the smooth development of the collision ionization process in the DC discharge region, thus providing a theoretical basis for the formation of large-area glow discharge. It was found that when the AC voltage was 1.8 kV and the DC voltage was 3.5 kV, the discharge phenomenon as shown in Fig. 11(c) was formed. Since the plasma formed by the discharge of the spiral-contact electrode does not completely cover the electrode, seed electrons are not evenly distributed. Therefore, it can be seen that the DC discharge is clustered, but its penetration is good and the overall glow discharge is obvious, with a width of around 8 mm. It can be seen that after the multi-anode arrangement, the power line is no longer contracted on the anode surface, and a slight increase in the voltage can ensure sufficient development of electronic collision ionization of DC discharge area, so a glow discharge covering a larger area can be produced.
It can be seen from the whole experimental process that in a coupled electrode structure, the pre-discharge of the spiral-contact electrode under the AC voltage provides seed electrons for the entire DC electric field space. At the same time, with AC and DC voltage coordinating with each other to suppress the excessive release of secondary electrons to the DC discharge area, the electronic avalanche in the DC electric field space develops evenly. Therefore, the electrode can get a stable and even glow discharge in the atmospheric air. This discharge phenomenon is consistent with the main features of glow discharge and can be considered as glow discharge or quasi-glow discharge.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, a method of forming a DC electric field discharge by using a three-potential electrode structure is proposed, and an electrode structure of a spiral-contact coupled anode is designed. With the combination of simulation and experiment, this study proves that the discharge of the electrode formed under atmospheric pressure presents the features of a typical glow discharge. The electrode structure has the following theoretical characteristics:
1. The generation of seed electrons is critical to the formation of glow discharges in direct current fields. By using the carbon fiber bundle gap, the spiral contact electrode generates a pre-discharge of under a low AC voltage, which provides a large number of seed electrons for the DC electric field to discharge.
2. Suppressing the release of secondary electrons in space is the key to suppressing filamentary discharge. The time-varying electric field in the space formed by the coupled electrode structure effectively suppresses the release of secondary electrons in the DC electric field space and creates the conditions for the formation of glow discharge in the DC electric field in the air.
3. A thorough glow discharge is formed in the lower DC field. By coupling the spiral contact electrode with the anode, the collision ionization gained proper development, thus giving birth to the glow discharge between the electrodes.
4. Multi-anode structures are used to achieve a large-area glow discharge. Arrangement of multiple anodes makes possible the even distribution of the electric field near the anode and thus the formation of a uniform discharge, increasing the size of glow discharge.
The plasma formed by the discharge has the characteristics of directional motion and is therefore very suitable for various applications such as surface treatment, sputtering film formation, vapor deposition, and the like. In the future, the parameters of the coupled electrode structure will be further optimized to meet the needs of various applications.
FIG. 1. 
Experimental layout of the co-ground potential spiral-contact electrode coupled anode.
FIG. 2. 
Schematic diagram of the co-ground potential spiral-contact electrode coupled anode.
FIG. 3. 
Respective electric field distribution when AC voltage is +1.8 kV and −1.8 kV. (a) +1.8 kV (b) −1.8 kV.
FIG. 4. 
Time-varying characteristics of space electric field. (a) Front view (b) Top view.
FIG. 5. 
Trend of electric field strength change function in space. (a) Electric field strength and reference curve. (b) The electric field strength of the fitting curve.
FIG. 6. 
Relationship between voltage U, spacing d, and the number of electrons reaching the anode.
FIG. 7. 
(a) and (b) Discharge phenomenon and (c) light intensity distribution on straight line g.
FIG. 8. 
Voltage and current waveform. (a) AC discharge alone; (b) AC/DC co-discharge.
FIG. 9. 
The discharge volt ampere characteristic curve under different voltages.
FIG. 10. 
Discharge morphology and its distribution in three dimensional light intensity.
FIG. 11. 
The formation of large-area discharge: (a) the electrode structure with multiple items; (b) the distribution of the electric field under the three cathodes; and (c) discharge phenomenon.
