Bacteria inactivation by atmospheric pressure plasma jet treatment
Atmospheric pressure plasmas have achieved great scientific and technological advances for a wide range of applications including the field of antimicrobial treatment. In this paper, a home-made atmospheric pressure plasma jet device was built and the effects of air plasma treatments on the inactivation of pure bacterial culture (Escherichia coli ATCC 8739) deposited onto the surface of agar plates were investigated. Plasmas were generated using high voltage discharge for 30, 60 and 90 s. The number of viable microorganisms was determined using a plate count method. Microbial Log_{10} reduction depended on the time of exposure and feed gas flow. A significant reduction of about 2.5 Log_{10} for E. coli was achieved within 60 s of plasma treatment. This result can be related to the presence of reactive species in the plasma volume, in particular, O radicals.
I. INTRODUCTION
Opportunistic bacterial pathogens represent a significant cause of human infections which may be acquired through interaction with a wide range of everyday or clinical circumstances, including the consumption of contaminated foods, via hospital environment, medical equipment or devices [1–3]. Moreover during last years the resistance of many bacteria to drugs (methicillin, oxacillin, etc.) is increased substantially [4]. Thus, there is great interest in new (nonthermal) antimicrobial process strategies. Atmospheric-pressure plasmas have attracted much attention in recent years as a promising source for various industrial applications due to their advantages such as the ability to provide a vast array of chemically active species without the need of elevated gas temperature and expensive vacuum equipment. The plasma operation depends on the electrical excitation which can vary from DC power to wave power with frequency from tens of hertz to megahertz (radio frequency) and to gigahertz (microwave). However, a basic requirement of all these operation methods is to avoid plasma instability such as the glow-to-arc transition. This is because the formation of local arc filaments leads to nonuniform plasma and an increase of temperature, as well as safety problems. Noble gases (Ar and He) are usually required to ensure stable plasma, but another solution is to use short high voltage pulses as energy source to form the plasma. In fact, if the pulse width is smaller than the characteristic time of the glow-to-arc transition (>100 ns) arcs do not have sufficient time to develop [5].
Atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ) is a relatively novel approach increasingly studied against a wide range of microbial pathogens [6–11]. The plasma is formed inside a device which is equipped with one or two electrodes and is expanded into the surrounding environment from a nozzle by gases flowing at typical rates of several liters per minute. Although there are a few plasma based processes commercially available, the complexity of the interaction between plasma and microorganisms prevents the breakthrough of this technology up to now. The plasma, which is often defined as the fourth state of matter, can be formed by supplying energy to a gas, leading to the generation of photons, electrons, positively and negatively charged ions, atoms, free radicals and excited or nonexcited molecules [12]. Although the exact mechanism of APPJ bactericidal action has yet to be elucidated, it is known that atmospheric air APPJ is a source of multiple chemically reactive species, including reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species, with a high bactericidal potency [13]. Those plasma species primarily interact with the cell membrane, causing its loss of integrity and thus the rapid inactivation of bacteria [14]. In this work, a home-made APPJ is described and the effects of air plasma treatments on the inactivation of Escherichia coli (ATCC 8739) seeded on agar plates were investigated. A high-voltage nanopulses generator was used as energy source allowing us to use only compressed air to form the plasma without the addition of noble gases. The operation with ambient air strongly reduced the system complexity and the costs.
II. EXPERIMENT
A. Plasma device
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation and a photograph of the experimental setup. The pulsed power generator (FID GmbH—FPG 30-100MC4S10) supplies electrically the APPJ (Ref [15]) via coaxial high-voltage cables. It delivers nanosecond voltage square pulses up to 30 kV at repetition rates from 12 to 100 kHz. The pulses rise time is 2–3 ns and their width at 90% is 13–15 ns. The supplied voltage is measured by a 1/1000 voltage probe (Tektronix P6015A, 75 MHz), and the electrical signals are visualized by means of a Tektronix digital oscilloscope (500 MHz). The APPJ is installed in a Faraday cage in order to avoid electromagnetic interferences. The dry air flow was adjusted into a range of 5–20 l/min by using a flowmeter.
The APPJ consists of two coaxial electrodes (≈1 mm electrodes distance) between which air flows at a high rate. The applied voltage between the electrodes accelerates free electrons and causes the gas to breakdown, initiating a plasma discharge. The energetic electrons undergo inelastic collisions with the feed gas producing excited state molecules and atoms (e.g., metastables), free radicals, and additional ion-electron pairs. These chemically active species exit the nozzle at a high velocity and impinge onto a surface positioned in front of the plasma jet. However, ions and electrons quickly recombine outside the jet and are probably not active in surfaces treatment under these conditions. The radiation emitted by the active species in the plasma jet was focused into an optical fiber by a focusing lens placed at a distance of 20 cm from the discharge (axial line of sight) and analyzed by optical emission spectroscopy (OES) using a high resolution (0.06 nm) iHR550 spectrometer (Horiba Jobin Yvon) coupled to a Synapse CCD camera (Horiba Jobin Yvon), thermoelectrically cooled to −70 °C (acquisition time 10 s).
B. Bacterial strains and growth conditions
The study was carried out using E. coli ATCC 8739, belonging to the American Type Culture Collection. Prior to each experiment, the strain was propagated twice in brain heart infusion (BHI) broth (Scharlau Microbiology, Spain) and incubated under aerobic/static conditions overnight (18 h) at 37 °C. An initial suspension of 10^{8} colony forming units (CFU)/ml was reached by measuring optical density at 625 nm with a microplate reader (Infinite F200 PRO, Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland). Simultaneously, viable count of the bacterial suspension was checked by preparing serial decimal dilutions of the bacterial culture in quarter-strength Ringer's solution (Scharlab S. L., Sentmenat, Spain) and plating on 3M™ Petrifilm™ E. coli/Coliform Count Plates (3M Italy, Pioltello, Italy).
C. Antimicrobial activity evaluation
The bacterial inactivation by APPJ treatment was evaluated through two different approaches, carrying out three biologically independent replicates for each experiment: (1) 5 μl (containing 10^{6} CFU) of the overnight E. coli culture were deposited in the center (2 cm in diameter) of BHI agar plates (3% agar). Before treatment, the inoculated plates were dried at room temperature for 15 min. Four plates were prepared for each time point. Immediately after treatment, two out of four plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and the halo of growth inhibition was observed, while the BHI agar in the remaining two plates was removed and homogenized in sterile dipotassium hydrogen phosphate solution (2% w/v; pH 7.5 ± 0.1). Decimal dilutions were prepared in quarter-strength Ringer's solution (Scharlab S. L.) and were plated on 3M Petrifilm E. coli/Coliform Count Plates (3M), according to manufacturer's instructions. The plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and the number of CFU determined. Results were expressed in Log_{10} CFU/plate. (2) Five microliter of the same E. coli culture were uniformly spread on the entire BHI agar plate surface and submitted to plasma exposure. Immediately after the treatment, two plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and the halo of growth inhibition was observed. The other two plates were analyzed as described above. For each experiment, non-APPJ-treated agar plates were used as control.
III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
A. APPJ parameters optimization
First of all, we had to define the window of stable operating conditions without apparent arcing of the device. The parameters taken into account were applied voltage (kV), pulses frequency (kHz), and air flux (l/min).
The breakdown voltage was found to be 3.5 kV, and the applied electric field could be increased until a maximum voltage of 7.5 kV before arcs started to appear. Regarding the pulses frequency, above 20 kHz the plasma became unstable (glow-to-arc transition) and this is probably due to an excessive transfer of power to the plasma which produces both the thermal and the kinetic effects in the discharge [16]. Finally, the discharge uniformity was not affected by the air flux. However, the gas flow rate controlled the length of the plasma jet and high fluxes were preferable due to a cooling effect of the electrodes.
Once the stable operating conditions were defined, we tried to maximize the bactericidal reactive species concentration in the discharge by OES. The emission spectrum of the plasma jet was recorded in the wavelength range of 300–900 nm. In the two spectral regions shown in Fig. 2, it is observed that the plasma chemistry is dominated by reactive neutral species such as oxygen and nitrogen rather than ions. In the range of 300–390 nm, the (0–0) vibronic transition of the N_{2} second positive system C^{3}π_{u}-B^{3}π_{g} was identified, while in the range of 740–860 nm, signals related to atomic oxygen and nitrogen. Previous studies reported that these highly reactive species have a high antibacterial power [13]. The intensity of the 777 nm triplet line of atomic oxygen was evaluated as a function of the applied voltage, pulses frequency, and air flux in order to find the most effective antibacterial conditions.
Figure 3 shows the emission line intensity of the 777 nm oxygen line as a function of the applied voltage and frequency. In both cases, the maximum intensity corresponds to the limits for plasma stable conditions that are 7.5 and 20 kHz. As soon as the plasma starts to become unstable, the signal intensity drops down.
After defining the optimal electrical parameters, the air flux effect was also investigated (Fig. 4). The atomic oxygen signal intensity increases by increasing the air flux. Moreover, as expected, the plasma jet becomes longer and larger for higher fluxes as shown in Fig. 5. In fact, doubling the air flow also doubles the length and the width, reaching the maximum extension of 1 cm and the width of 2 mm for the 20 l/min flux.
This procedure of experimental parameters optimization has led to choose 7.5 kV, 20 kHz, and 20 l/min as the APPJ parameters for the E. coli treatment.
The temperature of the plasma plume was evaluated as a function of the frequency, air flux, and treatment time up to 90 s in order to exclude possible contributions of bacteria inactivation due to thermal effects. The temperatures measured by a thermocouple positioned at 0.5 cm in front of the APPJ are reported in Fig. 6 and show the predictable trends. In fact, there is an increase in the temperature by increasing the frequency of the pulses due to the greater power supplied to the plasma, whereas the increase in the air flow leads to a cooling effect. Moreover, there is also a slight increase by a few degrees Celsius with the treatment time. The most important thing, however, is that under the optimal conditions defined for the antibacterial treatment the temperature is at most of 29.5 °C after 90 s. Therefore, at these temperatures, the thermal effects on bacteria can be neglected [17].
B. Antimicrobial activity
First of all, some control samples of E. coli ATCC 8739 deposited and spread onto the surface of agar plates were treated with only air without plasma in order to exclude any impact of the gas flow itself on the bacterial growth. Figure 7 shows the comparison between an untreated plate and one exposed to an air flow of 20 l/min for 90 s at a distance of 0.5 cm from the APPJ.
The air flow itself seems not to affect the E. coli distribution uniformity on the plate. No bacterial reduction was even observed from the antimicrobial activity evaluation (Δ Log_{10} CFU = 0.0 ± 0.12). Therefore, any bacterial inactivation will be attributed to the effect of the plasma.
The E. coli reduction was first evaluated as a function of the applied voltage (Fig. 8).
The E. coli reduction trend with the applied voltage is comparable with the atomic oxygen intensity (777 nm) one reported in Fig. 3(a). In fact, in both cases, there is a maximum for 7.5 kV and then there is a decrease when the discharge becomes unstable and nonuniform. This confirms the direct correlation between the emission at 777 nm and the antimicrobial activity. Therefore, although there are many reactive species involved in bacterial inactivation mechanisms, the atomic oxygen concentration can be a reliable indicator for the antibacterial activity efficiency.
The effect of air plasma treatment on reduction of E. coli was then evaluated as a function of the distance from the nozzle and the exposure time (Fig. 9).
The greatest bacterial reduction was obtained for an exposure of 60 s at 0.5 cm from the APPJ tip and it corresponds to ≈2.5 Log_{10} ± 0.13 CFU/plate. This result is comparable with the ones obtained by others group using APPJ plasmas with noble gas or O_{2.} [18–21] The consequences of the APPJ on microbial cells derive from the plasma reactive species and cell interactions. The treatment exposes the microbial cell to an intense bombardment by the radicals and reactive species, causing surface lesions that cannot be repaired rapidly [22]. The bacterial killing efficiency then decreases by increasing the distance. In fact, the Log_{10} reduction factor is reduced by half from 0.5 to 2 cm and this is likely due to the recombination and attachment of reactive species that rapidly increase with distance from the nozzle. Instead, regarding the treatment time dependence, the bacterial reduction does not improve after 60 s. The reason for this result can be easily explained by observing Fig. 10. The plasma treatment in fact is localized, thus acting effectively on an area of about 2 cm in diameter. Therefore, after 60 s, the plasma has successfully inactivated almost all the E. coli present in the treated zone, and for this reason, there are no improvements in bacterial reduction after 90 s. Plasma arrays or relative motions between the substrate and the APPJ are needed in order to enlarge the treatment area and thus enhance the bacterial reduction.
Finally, the dependence of the treatment efficiency on the initial bacteria concentration was also evaluated. A petri dish containing the same quantity of E. coli ATCC 8739 as the plates treated before (10^{6} CFU/plate) but concentrated on the effectively treated zone, i.e., 2 cm in diameter was prepared. The sample was then treated with the same plasma jet optimal condition previously defined (Fig. 11).
The bacterial reduction was found to be ≈1.5 Log_{10} ± 0.15; thus, 1 order of Log_{10} reduction factor less efficient than the sample treated in the same condition but with the bacteria distributed over the entire plate surface (reduction ≈2.5 Log_{10} ± 0.13, Fig. 10). This means that the concentration of bacteria plays an important role for antibacterial treatment in addition to the area to be treated. In fact, probably, if the concentration of bacteria is too high, they form multiple layers which act as a protection against the reactive species.
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
APPJ technology represents a promising tool for rapid and effective decontamination of material surface (also heat sensitive materials).
We have successfully developed an air APPJ using a high voltage nanosecond pulses generator. The advantage of using such short pulses is that there are packs of highly energetic electrons which have great efficiency in obtaining high density of reactive species, but, at the same time, the average power deposited into the plasma is low and the temperature is maintained around the room temperature.
First of all, the electrical parameters for a stable and uniform plasma jet were determined.
OES has detected the presence of molecular and atomic nitrogen and atomic oxygen, which are potential lethal plasma components.
Bacteria inactivation tests revealed that the atomic oxygen concentration can be a reliable indicator for the antibacterial activity efficiency. Therefore, the process parameters corresponding to the maximum intensity of 777 nm oxygen line were searched and used for the antibacterial treatment.
A maximum of 2.5 Log_{10} reduction factor of E. coli ATCC 8739 bacteria was found after direct plasma treatment of inoculated agar.
It was demonstrated that the effective treated area is much greater than the dimension of plasma plume. In fact, an effective treated area of approximately 2 cm in diameter was obtained with a plume of length and width of approximately 10 and 2 mm. With this approach, the effective area for surface treatment using multijets plasma could be greatly increased. This opens new perspectives regarding the decontamination of medical equipment and food.
It is also worth noting that this apparatus uses air as process gas obtaining results comparable to other devices which use noble gas or oxygen and this is crucial from the point of view of costs minimization.
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) (a) Schematic representation and (b) a photograph of the APPJ.
Fig. 2. 
Typical optical emission spectra of the plasma discharge, showing emission lines of (a) atomic nitrogen and oxygen and (b) molecular nitrogen.
Fig. 3. 
OES emission line intensity of the 777 nm oxygen line as a function of (a) the applied voltage and (b) the frequency.
Fig. 4. 
OES atomic oxygen signal (777 nm) intensity as a function of the air flux at 7.5 kV and 20 kHz.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) Photographs of the plasma jet at 7.5 kV and 20 kHz and different air fluxes: (a) 10 l/min, (b) 15 l/min, and (c) 20 l/min.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) Plasma jet temperature at 7.5 and 20 kHz measured by a thermocouple positioned at 0.5 cm in front of the APPJ, as a function of (a) the pulses frequency and (b) the air flux for different treatment times.
Fig. 7. 
(Color online) E. coli ATCC 8739 deposited onto the surface of agar plates before and after exposure for 90 s to an air flow of 20 l/min without plasma ignition, at a distance of 0.5 cm from the APPJ.
Fig. 8. 
Reduction of E. coli ATCC 8739 after air APPJ treatment as a function of the applied voltage.
Fig. 9. 
Reduction of E. coli ATCC 8739 after air APPJ treatment, as a function of the (a) distance and (b) time.
Fig. 10. 
(Color online) Localized zone of bacterial inactivation due to the air plasma treatment.
Fig. 11. 
(Color online) E. coli ATCC 8739 concentrated on the effectively plasma treated zone, before and after the plasma exposure.
