Qualification of TA6V alloy cleaning processes using supercritical CO_{2} cleaning, from coupled SEM, XPS, and TPD analyses
Traditional industrial cleaning processes of titanium and titanium alloys use solvents which are potentially toxic and environmentally harmful. Carbon dioxide, which is nontoxic, nonflammable, recyclable, and available on a large scale, is a potential substitute for these solvents. Indeed, the zero surface tension of supercritical CO_{2} (SC-CO_{2}) provides a significant advantage over liquid and aqueous solutions, and facilitates the access to small structures, while a high diffusion coefficient allows a fast rate of mass transfer. Moreover, its viscosity and density can be adjusted by tuning pressure and temperature. In this study, the performances of solvent-assisted SC-CO_{2} process are compared to traditional TA6V alloy cleaning processes. The efficiency of residual oil removal from a TA6V surface has been investigated by several techniques such as x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). While XPS gives a measure of the so-called relative atomic surface concentration of carbon, which is commonly used to characterize cleanliness of the surface in the nanometer range, both EPMA and SEM provide elementary analysis at μm^{3} range and are often associated with characterizing morphologies of protuberances. Temperature programmed desorption coupled to a quadrupole mass spectrometer has also been used to obtain qualitative information on the nature and the relative amounts of the species degassed from the polluted and cleaned material surfaces.
I. INTRODUCTION
Titanium alloys are widely used, for instance, for aeronautical applications. Indeed, three main properties distinguish titanium from other metals or alloys [1]: its low density (4.5 g/cm^{3}) which allows structure lightening, a high strength-to-weight ratio, and its corrosion resistance to aggressive media. Traditional industrial cleaning processes of such kind of material use solvents which are potentially toxic and environmentally harmful, such as the most commonly used dry-cleaning solvent, perchloroethylene, which is suspected to be carcinogenic.
Carbon dioxide can be used as a substitute for currently used dry-cleaning solvents because it is nontoxic, nonflammable, recyclable, and available on a large scale. Besides, the zero surface tension of supercritical CO_{2} (SC-CO_{2}) provides a significant advantage over liquid and aqueous solutions and facilitates the access to small structures, while a high diffusion coefficient allows a fast rate of mass transfer. Moreover, its viscosity and density can be adjusted by tuning pressure and temperature [2–4]. Nevertheless, the main disadvantage of CO_{2} is its limited ability to dissolve polar molecules. However, the characteristics of CO_{2} can be modified by the addition of miscible polar compounds called cosolvents. In supercritical fluid extraction, alcohols such as methanol [5], isopropyl alcohol (IPA) [6], and especially ethanol [7–11] can be used as cosolvent.
The efficiency of residual oil removal from a metallic surface can be investigated using most widely used techniques, such as x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) [12–14], scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) [15,16] or x-ray wavelength dispersive spectroscopy. Among these techniques, XPS and EPMA give information in different depth ranges. Hence, XPS is often used to measure the so-called relative atomic surface concentration of carbon (in atomic %) which is commonly used to characterize surface cleanliness in the nanometer range [17], while EPMA and SEM provide elementary analysis in the μm^{3} range and are often associated with characterizing morphologies of protuberances [18,19]. Besides these “surface” techniques, temperature programmed desorption (TPD) coupled to a selective detector, such as a mass spectrometer (MS), is today's most frequently used method for investigating the interactions between a material surface and adsorbed species. Although this technique is mainly used for “model” surfaces, some studies were done on the so called “real materials” such as aluminum alloys [20], nickel [21], stainless steels [22–25], or titanium [26], thus revealing its advantage in qualifying the efficiency of surface treatment such as chemical solvent cleaning, ultrasonic treatment in an alcoholic bath, mechanical polishing, etc. Although the technique is rather simple to implement, the derivation of the relevant information (such as kinetic data) from the measured desorption curves is fastidious, and TPD diagrams are mainly used to obtain qualitative information on the nature and the relative amounts of the substances degassed from the material surface.
In this paper, TA6V alloy cleaning processes, including solvent-assisted SC-CO_{2} process, are considered and their efficiency was compared using SEM, EPMA, XPS, and TPD-MS techniques.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Samples preparation
The cleaning procedures were tested on 15 × 15 × 4 mm^{3} TA6V alloy plates. In order to be representative of TA6V industrial surfaces, the samples were machined-cut using a classical industrial lubricant Blasocut BC25-MD oil (provided by the BLASER Company) and were preliminary cleaned using a classical solvent Forane, a dichlorofluoroethane-based cleaning solvent commercialized by Arkema. The as-obtained surface state constitutes the reference state (“R0”) of the samples and has been fully characterized. From this reference state, the effect of the cleaning procedure on the raw surface elements inventory was investigated first. In the same way, the effect of surface pollutants was studied. In each case, samples are polluted by immersion in a bath of contaminant (in the present case, Blasocut BC25-MD oil) without any mechanical action. Finally, the efficiency of various cleaning procedures to remove surface pollution was investigated for relevant configurations. Various cleaning procedures, including wiping with a solvent-impregnated tissue, ultrasonic waves' mechanical action, and the more innovative, although less usual, supercritical cleaning, have been investigated (Table I).
B. Characterization techniques
The SEM analyses were performed with JEOL JSM-6400F apparatus. EPMA analyses were then carried out with the same electron beam, using an acceleration voltage of 15 kV and an EDS detector (OXFORD).
XPS analyses of the samples were carried out with a Riber Mac2 analyzer. Spectra were recorded using a 300 W Mg Kα radiation (1253.6 eV). Emerging photoelectrons were analyzed with detection normal to the surface. Windows were then recorded for each interesting constituent (titanium, oxygen, and carbon) with a higher resolution. In this case, the working conditions were chosen in order to have a total resolution of the system equal to about 1.2 eV. Basic operations of smoothing and area calculations could be performed. In these cases, backgrounds were removed by a Shirley routine, and spectrum decomposition of complex lines was done by fitting with Gaussian (80%)–Lorentzian (20%) peaks.
The TPD-MS experiments were carried out in a vacuum chamber connected to a QMS (Hiden Analytical) employed also for residual gas analysis (RGA). The QMS is mounted on a stainless steel tube provided with a 5 mm hole at one end. During TPD experiments, the tube end is positioned 2 mm above the sample center. The tested sample is introduced rapidly and positioned on a copper plate, heated with a tungsten filament. The system is properly degassed prior to the sample introduction in order to ensure that the residual pressure of the chamber is lower than 2 × 10^{−8 }Pa after the sample introduction (the residual atmosphere is composed of mainly H_{2}). It increases to ca. 2 × 10^{−7 }Pa during the heating phase. A heating rate of 25 K min^{−1} has been chosen.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Pollutants and cleaning procedures effect on TA6V surface inventory
The influence of either the pollution process or the cleaning process alone (i.e., applied to reference-state samples) on the very near surface inventory was studied first using XPS. We particularly focused on the evolution of the amount of oxygen and carbon species, and hence on the evolution of the C1s and O1s core level photoemission signals.
The cleaning procedure's effect on the reference state inventory is shown in Fig. 1(a). In each case, the action of the cleaning agent results in an increase of the carbon species inventory (particularly important in the case of the aliphatic solvents C8 and C10) and a correlative decrease of the oxygen species inventory. This behavior reveals a contamination of the sample surface by the cleaning agent, except when a mechanical agent, such as ultrasonic waves, is used (see C9). The SC-CO_{2} process exhibits the same behavior as the ethanol wiping.
A first measurement of the cleaning procedure efficiency can be deduced from Fig. 1(b), where the C and O surface inventories after cleaning are compared to the polluted state P1. Here, the amount of carbon species decreases after cleaning in each case, except for the SC-CO_{2} process without the additive (C3), where a slight increase in the C1s signal is observed, entirely due to C-C and C-H contribution (no evolution of the C-OH contribution was detected).
B. Focus on the SC-CO_{2} cleaning process study
1. Detailed XPS analysis
For each specimen, a survey photoemission spectrum, as well as detailed spectra on main core level lines (Ti2p, C1s, and O1s), was recorded. The latter are presented in Fig. 2 for the SC-CO_{2} cleaning processes, C3–C7, respectively, applied on Blasocut-polluted samples (Po). In the case of polluted surface, the Ti2p scan is not shown in Fig. 2(a). Indeed, only C1s and O1s core level photoemission signals can be distinguished on the survey scan. The fact that no line of the alloy element is observable is not surprising. Indeed, due to the small inelastic mean free path of the photoelectrons emitted, only the first atomic layers of the surface are probed, and the oil at the nanoscale is sufficient to completely conceal the surface of the alloy. The presence of such an organic coverage on the surface of the Po samples has been confirmed by secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) experiments. Whereas on clean titanium specimens three oxidized forms are usually observed [27,28] (TiO_{2}, Ti_{2}O_{3}, and TiO), together with metallic contribution of the substrate, the Ti2p spectra in Fig. 2(b) exhibits only one component (at ca. 458.8 and 464.5 eV for 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks, respectively) corresponding to TiO_{2}. Since this oxidized form is the major constituent of the native oxide [29], the latter observation suggests that, in the case of the samples under study, the oxide layer is thick.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(b), sample surfaces usually exhibit a C1s line composed of a huge main component at 285.4 eV and a weak and broad one at 289.7 eV. The former component is related to C-C and C-H bonds whereas the latter corresponds to C-O bonds. Considering the oil composition, the C-C or C-H bonds was expected to be predominant. Besides, for cleaned samples, the ratio between C-C/C-H and C-O bonds changes. The ratio increases in the presence of the additive such as acetone (C4), ethanol (C5), or isopropyl alcohol (C7) and decreases without the additive (C3) or using hexane (C6). Actually, this phenomenon is probably not only related to the efficiency of oil removal, yet indicating that additives are likely to modify the sample surface during the cleaning process using SC-CO_{2}. This point can be supported by the fact that the broad C-O component does not take place always at the same binding energy and can even be composed of several subcomponents as in the case of isopropyl alcohol additive where the three components can be distinguished after decomposition, as depicted in Fig. 3. In this case, although two components at 284.5 and 288.8 eV can be attributed to C-C/C-H and C-O bonds, respectively, an additional component at ca. 288.8 eV should be considered and may be related to C-OH bonds. Besides, the intensity of C1s line strongly decreases after each cleaning process.
Polluted surfaces exhibit also a noticeable O1s line composed of two main components at 531.2 and 533.3 eV [Fig. 2(c)]. Because no metallic element is detected, none of them is characteristic of the oxide overlayer. Actually, these components are probably related to water for the one at higher binding energy and OH radicals of oil constituents for the other. After cleaning, the O1s line's shape changes drastically, exhibiting a main line in the 532.0–531.3 eV range as well as a contribution near 529.5 eV. Although the main component is probably due to C-O and O-H bonds, the latter component can be related to titanium oxide.
In order to estimate the oil removal efficiency, the C1s/Ti2p area ratio was considered. Assuming homogeneous pollution of alloy by residual oil traces, this ratio allows a kind of quantification of remaining oil at the alloy surface, i.e., a kind of measurement of oil removal. Figure 4 clearly shows that the addition of a solvent to SC-CO_{2} improves the cleaning process, the amount of remaining carbon at the sample surface being noticeably decreased through the effect of the cosolvent. Moreover, isopropyl alcohol is the additive which induces a rapid decrease in the C1s/Ti2p ratio, i.e., the best cleaning. The O1s/Ti2p area ratio is also reported in Fig. 4. Unlike the C1/Ti2p ratio, the O1s/Ti2p appeared to remain constant, regardless of the additive used. This observation, although it is not a proof, is in agreement with the presence of a bare oxide layer at the surface of the cleaned samples.
2. TPD-MS analysis
Besides the XPS analysis, TPD-MS experiments were performed in order to identify the desorbing molecules and to compare their relative amount as well. Moreover, thermodynamics as well as kinetic data can be obtained by TPD experiments, thus enabling the samples behavior in ultravacuum environment, representative of particles accelerator or aerospace environments, to be apprehended by simulation. Results are presented and compared for the reference state (R0), the polluted state (Po), and after cleaning procedures involving SC-CO_{2} (C3–C7).
In order to identify the relevant species in the scope of the TPD-MS analysis, a RGA scan was first recorded on a polluted sample heated from room temperature (RT) to 300 °C. The main characteristic features exhibited by MS were recorded at 2 u.m.a. related to H_{2}, 18 u.m.a. related to H_{2}O, 28 u.m.a. related to CO, 43 u.m.a. related to an organic compound (oil), and 44 u.m.a. related to CO_{2}. The amounts of alcohol and methane detected are very less.
The relevant signals, measured from RT to 450 °C on a Po sample, are shown in Fig. 5. The early water evolution, beginning at 40 °C, reveals that physically absorbed water is the major contributor to the water desorption signal. Since each accident on the curves represents a particular desorption phenomenon, the recorded TPD signal reveals that several phenomena occur successively. Indeed, whatever the compound considered, the major desorption phenomena appear at the temperature close to 120 °C, presumably due to thermal decomposition of the pollutant, releasing hydrogen and carbonaceous species. The desorption processes appear to be completed at around 200 °C, except for hydrogen and water. A gradual increase in the H_{2} and H_{2}O signals is indeed observed above this temperature. This behavior is characteristic of a diffusion process from the bulk to the interface, involving dissolved species rather than the adsorbed ones. Therefore, the high temperature part of the TPD signal should not be sensitive to the cleaning procedure.
Figure 6 compares the signals recorded for the reference (R0), polluted (Po), and clean (C7) samples. With regard to oil, the signal before pollution is extremely weak (and representative of the industrial supplier cleaning procedure R0). The signal becomes very important after pollution indicating that a large quantity of oil remains adsorbed at the sample surface. After the SC-CO_{2} cleaning, a weak signal is recovered, even weaker than prior to pollution, indicating that the SC-CO_{2} procedure is more efficient than the “classical” one.
The hydrogen signal is the most intense signal detected during the heating phase [see Fig. 7(a)]. Regarding the cleaned sample (C7), this signal is primarily characterized by a peak centered at 140 °C, that is to say, close to the presumably oil thermal decomposition process. Above 200 °C, the continuously growing tail, characteristic of the thermally activated diffusion process, is observed. The low temperature signal is strongly exacerbated before cleaning (Po), as previously observed. It is also present on the reference sample analysis, where it is not resolved from the diffusion signal. Additional experiments, carried out at higher temperatures, have shown that the hydrogen diffusion signal never decreases in the interval of time dedicated to the experiment. This behavior suggests that the hydrogen amount dissolved in the sample is quite important. SIMS experiments carried out in dynamic mode (not shown here) have indicated that hydrogen was actually distributed in a homogeneous way in the bulk, without subsurface over concentration. The peak observed toward 140 °C for the cleaned sample, although it reveals residual oil traces at the sample surface, exhibits a smaller area than in the reference state, and is totally resolved from the diffusion tail. This again attests from the C7 procedure cleaning efficiency. A surprising point is the drastic decrease in the slope of the diffusion signal as compared with the reference (R0) and polluted (Po) samples. The latter may be explained by a structural modification, morphological or elementary, of the sample surface layers, thus impeding the diffusion process through the surface oxide coating.
CO and CO_{2} desorption curves are shown in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c). They show many similarities: Regarding the reference and the polluted samples (R0 and Po, respectively), both species exhibit two main desorption steps at ca. 80 and 120 °C. Numerical identification of these peaks to classical desorption models (see Appendix) indicates that the first stage is one-order (involving one adsorb specie) whereas the second one is of two-order (involving two adsorbed species). This second stage might therefore be associated with a reaction process occurring on the surface. It can be attributed to either the previously evoked oil thermal decomposition or an oxidation process involving carbon species and the oxide layer. Regarding the cleaned sample (case c), however, only the two-order process is detected, the quantities of desorbed CO and CO_{2} yet being extremely weak.
The desorption of water also proceeds in two stages, as highlighted in Fig. 7(d): a first stage lying between 40 and 100 °C, which could correspond to the physically absorbed water desorption, and a second stage toward 150 °C, which would be more compatible with a decomposition of hydroxyl groups or hydroxide layers. The cleaning procedure C7 induces a major reduction of the water molecules signal, especially the one corresponding to the inventory absorbed at low temperature, which may be due to a possible reaction within the oxide layer.
For other species (radicals alcohol which can come from various molecules, methane, nitrogen dioxide, etc.), the desorption of which being very weak as compared with the major species, the desorbed amount is always lower for the cleaned sample than for the reference one. Moreover, for all these species, the observed peaks take place appreciably at the same temperature for both samples. This indicates that the desorption processes are not modified by the cycle pollution/cleaning. It is the same for the alcoholic species since if the general intensity of their TPD diagram appreciably decreases after cleaning; the activation temperature is not affected.
3. SEM observations
Figure 8(a) shows a SEM picture of a polluted TA6V sample (Po). Some stripes are observable at the sample surface, resulting from the manufacturing process. No particles can be revealed. Microprobe experiments carried out at several spots of the surface do not reveal any heterogeneity of the sample composition: titanium and aluminum, as well as oxygen, are always detected with a ratio compatible with the alloy composition. The surface sample is thus composed of titanium and aluminum oxides. Traces of vanadium are also detected, but the signal is too low to allow quantification. However, a high atomic concentration of carbon (ca. 40%) is also revealed by this technique. Considering the depth analyzed by the microprobe technique (ca. 1 μm), one can suppose that the superficial oxide layer is covered by several tens of nanometers of oil. Cleaning with the use of SC-CO_{2} flow does not change the surface morphology [Fig. 8(b)]. Stripes are still observed. Nevertheless, particles are now present on the sample surface. Microprobe analyses of these protuberances show that these latter are mainly composed of carbon, oxygen, titanium, aluminum, and copper (up to 10%). The particles also exhibit traces of elements such as sodium, zinc, and brome. The evidence of these particles at the surface of “cleaned” samples is quite surprising and appeared to be specific to TA6V. It was indeed not observed on the other metallic samples studied. This suggests that the TA6V “clean” surface is highly attractive (maybe involving electrostatic phenomena) to either atmospheric or conditioning materials. Another explanation could be that these spherical clusters consist in carbon nanoparticles derived from carbon dioxide dissociation at the critical point [30]. This point should be further investigated. Anyway, as discussed below, the pathology exhibited by SEM, suggesting additional pollution of the surface, is not corroborated by the TPD measurements, as described earlier.
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
With regard to the tested decontamination processes, one can indicate that if the protocol of cleaning of the TA6V (polluted by oil) with the use of a SC-CO_{2} flow with a cosolvent made of isopropyl alcohol (1%) leaves some impurities having the shape of small grains on the surface. If some oil traces seem still detectable on the surface after the treatment, the amount of species desorbing after this cleaning procedure is very weak, weaker in any case than for a material not initially polluted by oil. In addition, the processes of desorption are apparently not dramatically affected by the procedure of cleaning even though hydrogen initially dissolved in the alloy bulk desorbs slowly after cleaning treatment.
Besides, the TPD seems to be a very powerful technique to qualify cleaning. Indeed, this technique offers the advantage of determining the chemical species which will leave the material during such heat treatment. It is also easy to quantitatively compare the quantities desorbed by two samples. An absolute quantification could be possible, but this would require long calibrations.
APPENDIX
Identification of the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters of a given specie desorption processes can be achieved by mathematical analysis of the TPD-MS results. According to the kinetic theory of gases, valid at low pressure, the interactions between the gaseous molecules and the vessel walls are mainly collisions, and the molecules' residence time at the surface after collision is the time required to form a monolayer of the adsorbed molecules. Other kinds of interactions actually exist between the gaseous molecules and the walls, inducing a longer retention time than those predicted by this theory. These sorption phenomena are usually distinguished by the nature (and the strength) of the bond which can be either physical (van der Waals forces) or chemical designated as physisorption or chemisorption, respectively. Finally, the molecules may penetrate and dissolve in the solid bulk, leading to their absorption.
In physisorption, the electronic orbital of the adsorbed specie are not modified. The adsorption rate (in mol m^{−2} s^{−1}) is equal to the product of the impingent rate (derived from pressure by the kinetic theory of gases) times a sticking coefficient α representing the mechanical energy exchanged between the impinging molecule and the surface. Physisorption is an order-one phenomenon regarding the specie concentration (expressed as the pressure).
Correlatively, the desorption process is order-one regarding the concentration of the adsorbed specie (X*). It is furthermore a thermally activated process, during which the activation energy equals the heat of adsorption Q of the desorbed molecule
where Q (in J) stands for the heat of adsorption, T is the temperature (in K), R is the ideal gas constant, and ν is the frequency (in s^{−1}).
In chemisorption, conversely, a true chemical bond exists between the adsorbed molecule and the surface. As for classical chemical reactions, chemisorption is a thermally activated process. Moreover, it is a localized mechanism: the bond is indeed preferentially formed on favorable surface site(s). There are several possible mechanisms: (1) the adsorption of one molecule can either proceed on one or two adjacent sites; (2) the molecule may undergo dissociation, thus leading to the adsorption of several (usually two) fragments, etc. Each specific mechanism has its own kinetics. Formally, the desorption flux from a molecule chemisorbed on one site is written similarly as for a physisorbed specie
where k (in s^{−1}) designates kinetic constants. The desorption process activation energy E_{d} is the sum of the activation energy of the (reversed) adsorption process and the heat of adsorption.
In the case of the dissociate adsorption on two adjacent sites, the desorption rate is analogous to the rate of a biparticular process
Sorption phenomena are reversible processes: at equilibrium, the flux of desorption balances that of adsorption. The equilibrium can be displaced either by the elimination of the desorbed species (under dynamic vacuum conditions) or by heating (thus increasing favorably the desorption kinetics), or by both, as in the case of the TPD-MS experiments. In the following, it is assumed that only one- or two-order desorption processes are involved. More elevated order processes, i.e., involving more than two components, are indeed rather scarce.
During an experiment, the sample is gradually heated according to a linear ramp: T = T_{0} + βt, where T_{0} is the initial temperature, β the heating rate, and t stands for the times. The signal intensity I, measured for each component by the spectrometer, is proportional to its desorption rate
In a first step, the coordinates of the peak maximum provide an estimation of a multiplier of the activation energy, where n is the order of the desorption process (n = 1 or 2)
The numerical values of the temperature at the peak maximum, T_{max}, and of (dX^{*}/dT){T=Tmax} are directly read on the curve, while the amount of adsorbed species at this point, Xmax*, is derived from a graphical integration, knowing that:
(1) the global peak area represents the initial concentration: X0*=∫T_{0}T_{∞}(dX^{*}/dT)dT;
(2) the total amount of desorbed molecule at T_{max} is given by: X0*−X_{mas}=∫T_{0}T_{max}(dX^{*}/dT)dT.
In a second step, each of the desorption peak is considered as the response of either a one-order or a two-order process, to the given thermal solicitation. That is, respectively,
The parameters k_{0} and X0* are thus identified from the experimental peak by fitting, thanks to a least square minimization algorithm (using an Excel^{®} macro). Finally, providing the estimation of the activation energy multiplier calculated at the first step, the model exhibiting the best agreement with the experimental results is chosen.
The results obtained for TA6V illustrated in Fig. 9 exhibit a one-order, unique mechanism behavior for CO_{2}, CO, and H_{2} desorption processes, while H_{2}O desorption appears to be governed by both a one-order process (likely physisorbed water desorption) and a two-order process with a higher activation energy (presumably hydroxyl recombination and desorption).
Table I. 
Description of the reference state sample (denoted “R0”) and of the investigated pollution and cleaning procedures (denoted “Po” and “Cx,” respectively). Note that the cleaning procedures C1 and C3 have been tested on both the reference (R0) and the polluted (Po) samples, whereas the cleaning procedures C2 and C4 to C7 have been applied to polluted samples only, and C8 to C10 on reference samples only.
Table I. -body
Reference	Description
R0	Machined-cut using Blasocut BC25-MD oil and preliminary cleaned using a Forane.
Po	R0 → immersion (several hours) in Blasocut BC25-MD oil → drainage → dry wiping
C1	Ethanol wiping
C2	Immersion in an ultrasonic ethanol bath (30 min, 40 Hz)
C3	Supercritical CO_{2} cleaning (30 min, 200 bar, 50 °C)
C4	SC-CO_{2} cleaning + 1% acetone (30 min, 200 bar, 50 °C)
C5	SC-CO_{2} cleaning + 1% ethanol (30 min, 200 bar, 50 °C)
C6	SC-CO_{2} cleaning + 1% hexane (30 min, 200 bar, 50 °C)
C7	SC-CO_{2} cleaning + 1% IPA (30 min, 200 bar, 50 °C)
C8	Forane (Arkema) wiping
C9	Immersion in an ultrasonic Forane bath (30 min, 40 Hz)
C10	Super Solvent 622 (aliphatic hydrocarbon, Fuchs) wiping
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) Effect of the cleaning procedure on the carbon and oxygen inventories. The inventory is expressed as the percentage difference between the peak area in the XPS spectrum of the clean sample and that of the reference sample. In case (a), the reference is the raw TA6V surface “R0.” In case (b), the reference is the polluted TA6V surface “Po.”
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Effect of the supercritical CO_{2} cleaning procedures on (a) the Ti2p core level spectra, (b) the C1s core level spectra, and (c) the O1s core level spectra of TA6V polluted surface “Po.” The Ti2p spectra of the polluted sample Po is not reported in (a) since it was not distinguishable on the survey spectra.
Fig. 3. 
Decomposition of C1s core level spectrum recorded for a TA6V alloy sample surface obtained after pollution “Po” followed by supercritical CO_{2} cleaning with isopropyl alcohol (C7).
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) Effect of the various supercritical CO_{2} cleaning procedures on the C1s/Ti2p area ratio and on the O1s/Ti2p.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) Mass spectroscopy signals (ionic current in arbitrary unit) the main desorbing species from a polluted TA6V sample “Po” during the course of the temperature programmed desorption experiment. The hydrogen signal is divided by 10.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) Ionic current (in arbitrary unit) of the organic species of atomic masse 43 u.m.a. desorbing from the TA6V alloy surface. Comparison of the reference state R0, the polluted sample Po, and the sample after supercritical CO_{2} cleaning with isopropyl alcohol C7. The R0 and C7 signals are zoomed in the insert.
Fig. 7. 
(Color online) Comparison of the desorption spectra measured on TA6V alloy surfaces at the reference state R0, after pollution Po, and supercritical CO_{2} cleaning with isopropyl alcohol C7. (a), (b), (c), and (d) stands for the ionic current of H_{2}, CO, CO_{2}, and H_{2}O (each in arbitrary unit), respectively.
Fig. 8. 
SEM picture of a polluted TA6V alloy sample Po (a) and of the same sample after supercritical CO_{2} cleaning C7 (b).
Fig. 9. 
(Color online) Example of numerical analysis. Case of the decomposition of the H_{2}O desorption peak (recorded with a heating ramp of β = 0.42 K s^{−1}) in two successive processes of orders 1 and 2, respectively.
