3D printed high performance strain sensors for high temperature applications
Realization of high temperature physical measurement sensors, which are needed in many of the current and emerging technologies, is challenging due to the degradation of their electrical stability by drift currents, material oxidation, thermal strain, and creep. In this paper, for the first time, we demonstrate that 3D printed sensors show a metamaterial-like behavior, resulting in superior performance such as high sensitivity, low thermal strain, and enhanced thermal stability. The sensors were fabricated using silver (Ag) nanoparticles (NPs), using an advanced Aerosol Jet based additive printing method followed by thermal sintering. The sensors were tested under cyclic strain up to a temperature of 500 °C and showed a gauge factor of 3.15 ± 0.086, which is about 57% higher than that of those available commercially. The sensor thermal strain was also an order of magnitude lower than that of commercial gages for operation up to a temperature of 500 °C. An analytical model was developed to account for the enhanced performance of such printed sensors based on enhanced lateral contraction of the NP films due to the porosity, a behavior akin to cellular metamaterials. The results demonstrate the potential of 3D printing technology as a pathway to realize highly stable and high-performance sensors for high temperature applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
High temperature sensors are used in several applications such as nuclear, aerospace, and power generation systems [1]. Recent trends toward the use of lightweight structures in such systems can result in high static or dynamic loads giving rise to the need for in-situ measurement of component strain [2,3]. The strain sensors when used at high temperatures, however, face several challenges due to the hostile operating conditions that can affect sensor electrical and mechanical performances through degradation mechanisms such as oxidation, drift currents, thermal strain, and creep [2,4,5].
Various materials and fabrication techniques have been adopted in the past to monitor strain at high temperatures [2,3]. Temperature compensated Nickel-Chromium (Ni-Cr) bulk alloys were proposed for strain measurement under oxidizing environments of gas turbines [2]. Palladium-13% Chromium (Pd-13%Cr) based sputtered thin film strain gages were tested for engine applications on substrates such as superalloys and ceramics [3]. Surface acoustic wave sensors were considered for the measurement of strain using piezoelectric materials such as Langasite [6–8]. Resistive strain gages based on Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) [9] and Tantalum Oxynitride were used for applications up to 180 °C [10]. In all the above studies, obtaining a reliable sensor performance has proven to be highly challenging due to high thermal strain, drift currents, engine geometry, and oxidation.
Several other methods and materials were investigated recently to understand the behavior of printed sensors for large strain applications. Gonçalves et_al reported the use of composites based on biocompatible thermoplastic elastomer styrene-ethylene/butylene-styrene (SEBS) as the matrix and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as nanofillers for strain sensor applications [11,12] which provides a gauge factor (GF) of ∼3.0. The low T_{g} of such polymer composite sensors, however, hinders their application at high temperatures. Wei et_al [13] have constructed highly sensitive hybrid strain sensors using silver nanowires and layered double hydroxides. The use of polymers, however, limits their applicability to relatively low temperatures. Research has also been performed on graphite thin films for strain sensor applications [14,15].
Recently 3-D printing technologies have been explored to fabricate sensors where nanoparticles of interest are directly printed onto a component and sintered to create a sensor film. Such a process involves improved integration of sensors with the component, and requires fewer process steps, less material waste, and minimal use of hazardous chemicals [16–19]. In addition, the printing technologies can create 3D electronics [20] or electronics on curved surfaces [21], not possible with conventional lithography and MEMS-based methods [21,22]. Amongst the 3-D printing technologies, the Aerosol Jet (AJ) method has been used to print a wide variety of materials for sensors and other applications. In the AJ method, a mist of nanoparticle ink droplets is created which is directed by a carrier gas to the substrate to print features at a length scale of 10 μm on any arbitrary surface. Furthermore, the AJ method has been used to manufacture touch sensors [23], solar cells [24,25], electronic interconnects [26], biosensors [27], strain sensors [16,28], gate dielectrics [29], and 3-D antenna structures [21]. Room temperature AJ printed strain sensors were evaluated by Maiwald et_al [17] Our previous work has demonstrated that silver (AG) nanoparticle films can dramatically enhance stability and oxidation resistance for high temperatures up to 500 °C [30]. It was shown that, under a certain sintering condition, such films can also show a stable electrical behavior [30]. Motivated by the challenges and considering the superior quality of 3D printed Ag, we hypothesize that the printed and sintered nanoparticle films can provide stable sensor performance at high temperatures. Furthermore, speculating that the porous geometry of sintered nanoparticle films can result in a high Poisson ratio (i.e., lateral contraction to linear strain) due to its metamaterial-like structure, a high gauge factor can be expected. We also believe that the control over morphology, shape, and geometry of the sintered spheres can result in low thermal strain for improved measurement accuracy.
Thus, the impetus for the present work is to realize a reliable strain sensing platform at high temperatures and a testing method that can benefit several industry [4] and defense requirements [1,5]. In addition, through the fundamental work on Ag films, exploring the benefits of the 3-D printing methods may provide opportunities to fabricate sensors with superior mechanical and electrical properties for high temperature applications.
II. MANUFACTURING AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A. Sensors fabrication
The strain sensors were fabricated by Aerosol Jet printing and sintering of silver nanoparticles on a rectangular cantilever beam substrate (approximately 25.4 mm × 127.4 mm × 2 mm) made from stainless steel. Figure 1 shows the schematic of the substrate preparation and nanoparticle printing processes. First, the cantilever beam substrate was cleaned in four steps: degreasing, surface abrasion (dry and wet), conditioning, and neutralizing. The degreasing step involved the use of CSM-2 degreaser to remove oils, greases, and other possible contaminants from the beam. The surface was then abraded using 320 grit silicon carbide paper to remove any possible adherents such as scale, rust, paint, etc. A wet abrasion process was then performed using 320 grit SiC paper followed by 400 grit SiC paper using a conditioner solution (Conditioner A, Vishay Precision Group, Wendell, NC). The substrate surface was further scrubbed using cotton tip with the same conditioner solution, followed by a neutralizer solution (M-Prep Neutralizer 5A, Vishay Precision Group, Wendell, NC). As a final step, H-cement was applied to the desired position (where the sensor material was to be printed) using Kapton tape as a temporary dam and a blade-tip as a leveler. The H-cement was air dried for minimum 2 h, followed by heat curing at 93 °C (200 °F) for 30 min, and at 176 °C (350 °F) for 30 min, and had a final thickness of about 75 μm. The surface of the H-cement was treated with an atmospheric plasma (Atomflo™ 400, Surfx^{®} Technologies LLC, Redondo Beach, CA) at 100 W for 3 min.
An Aerosol Jet (AJ) micro-additive printer (AJ-300, Optomec, Inc., Albuquerque, NM) was used to fabricate the sensor electrodes. Prior to printing the structure, the sensor schematic was fed to the 3-D printer using the software AutoCAD 2015 (Autodesk Inc., San Rafael, CA, USA). The AJ method allows the deposition of nanoparticles dispersed in a solvent (i.e., nanoparticle ink) onto a substrate by creating a mist of particles guided by a carrier gas. The AJ printing system includes two atomizers (ultrasonic and pneumatic), a programmable XY motion stage, and a deposition head. A solvent-based Ag nanoparticle ink (Perfect-TPS 50 G2, Clariant Group, Frankfurt, Germany) was placed in the ultrasonic atomizer which continuously creates a mist of the ink solution with a droplet size of 1–5 μm (each droplet containing multiple nanoparticles) [31]. The mist was carried to the deposition head with N_{2} gas. The mist was then focused with the help of a secondary gas (also N_{2}) to form a micro-jet that exited the nozzle. The nozzle diameter used during the printing process was 200 μm. The printing process parameters are mentioned in Table I. The sensors were printed using at least three layers of deposited ink with individual electrodes formed by multiple lateral (i.e., side-by-side) passes. During printing, the standoff distance between the substrate and the nozzle was kept at about 3 mm. Note that the optimized parameters such as sheath gas pressure, atomizing pressure, and exhaust pressure were suitable for the ink formulation used in the current work but can vary for other inks depending on their viscosity, particle size, and the solvent. The silver nanoparticle ink had a viscosity of about 1.5 cP, sizes between 30–50 nm, and a particle loading of 40 ± 2 wt. %. Before printing the structures, the ink material was placed in a tube which was rotated continuously around its axis for 12 h using a tube roller (Scilogex MX-T6-S, Rocky Hill, CT, USA) at about 70 rpm to prevent nanoparticle agglomeration within the ink.
The printed film of nanoparticles was sintered at 200 °C for 6.5 h in a programmable oven (Neytech Vulcan furnace, Model 3-550, Degussa-Ney Dental Inc., Bloomfield, CT, USA) to create conductive films that formed the electrodes of strain sensors. The sintering conditions were determined from our previous work such that they ensured a stable electrical performance with minimal microstructural changes under usage for temperatures up to 500 °C [30]. The sensors were physically characterized by SEM and a 3-D profilometer (Dektak-XT, Bruker, Billerica MA). A silver based conductive epoxy (Pyro-duct 597-a, Aremco, Valley Cottage, NY) was used to connect the wires with the samples. Conductive epoxy was ambient cured overnight followed by heat cure at 93 °C (200 °F) for 2 h. A digital 712 digit precision multimeter (Keysight 34470A, Santa Rosa, CA) and a 4-wire probing arrangement was used to measure the resistance change. A standard calibration method was performed to remove any parasitic effects before resistivity measurements.
B. High temperature test set-up
The sensor test set-up was custom fabricated and integrated with an oven (Ney Vulcan 3-550 oven, Degussa-Ney Dental, Inc., Bloomfield, CT) for high temperature measurement. The schematic, the 3-D drawing, and the actual test set-up are shown in Figs. 2(a), 2(b), and 2(c), respectively. The test set-up consisted of a stepper motor, a driver to command the motor, a cantilever base made of high temperature Inconel alloy, and a ceramic pushrod driven by a cam that deflected the cantilever beam. A stepper motor (HT34-490, Applied Motion, Watsonville, CA) was mounted onto the oven that drove the cam. The motor was controlled by a driver (STAC6-Q, Applied Motion, Watsonville, CA) using a PC with the Q-programmer software. The cam and the driver motor were mounted on the oven, while the spring loaded ceramic pushrod entered into the oven and pushed down on the free end of the cantilever beam with the strain gage [Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)]. The base of the cantilever was clamped onto the Inconel base and the sensor assembly was placed inside the oven. The system was designed to deflect the substrate to ∼15.5 mm and provide 1000 με. By changing the cam design, a strain of up to 1500 με or more could be achieved. From simple beam theory, the strain in the sensor was correlated with the pushrod deflection by
where δ is the deflection of the beam at the end, t and L are the beam thickness and length, respectively, and x is the location of the strain gage from the loading point. The force, P, on the pushrod can then be calculated using P=(Eεbt^{2})/(6x), with b being the width of the beam.
C. Calibration methodology
Before printing the sensor on the substrate, it was necessary to use a standard commercial gage to measure/calibrate the strain experienced by the cantilever beam (at the location where the printed strain gage was to operate). Two types of standard gages, a WK^{®} series gage having a resistance of 350 Ω and a EA^{®} series gage having a resistance of 120 Ω (Vishay Precision Group, Wendell, NC), were used for the calibration. The beam deflection was set at a low frequency of 0.5 Hz by writing an appropriate program in Q-programmer. The strain in the beam was calculated using the following equation:
where ΔR/R_{0} is the relative resistance change with respect to the initial reference resistance R_{0}, and GF is the gauge factor of the sensor provided by the supplier for the standard gages. This value was then to be used to calibrate the printed sensors.
D. Strain measurement at high temperatures
To measure the strain of printed sensors at high temperatures, a four-wire constant current method was adopted. A schematic of the measurement method is shown in supplementary material, Fig. S1. An excitation current of 2 mA was sent to the gage circuit using a Micro-measurement 2210-B signal conditioning amplifier (Vishay Precision Group, Wendell, NC). The sensor signal was then amplified by 3300 times using the signal conditioning amplifier and the data were recorded through an oscilloscope (Tektronix, TDS 31014B, Four Channel Digital Phosphor Oscilloscope, Beaverton, OR). To reduce the effect of thermal drift during the high temperature measurements, the substrate was continuously deflected at 10 Hz. The amplified output was then captured through the oscilloscope in terms of voltage. We note that when the substrate was deflected at 10 Hz, the maximum deflection of the beam recorded was lower compared to the maximum deflection at 0.5 Hz due to the inertia of the system unable to cope-up with the dynamics of the ceramic push-rod. The substrate strain of about 400 με was recorded in this case.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Sensor morphology and calibration
Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the computer aided design (CAD) schematic and optical images of the strain sensors at different magnifications, respectively. The sensor was designed with target resistances of ∼1–5 Ω. A pair of large pads were also printed at the ends of the sensor for electrical contacts for external measurements [Fig. 3(b)]. The higher magnification image of a representative printed sensor in Fig. 3(c) indicates a uniform edge in all the regions. The electrode width variation was measured at 50 locations under an optical microscope and shows a mean width of 67.7 μm and a variation of ±2.7 μm, or 3.9% of the electrode width as shown in Fig. 3(d), indicating good repeatability of the printing process by the AJ micro-additive manufacturing process. A 3-D profilometer scan of the printed sensor is shown in Fig. 3(e).
Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show representative SEM micrographs of the samples sintered at 200 °C for 6.5 h and that exposed to 500 °C for 10 min with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in each case. The film microstructure consisted of micro- and nano-porosity as would be expected from sintered nanoparticle morphology. Note that the sintering conditions were optimized based on our previous findings, where the circuit impedance was found to be a function of the initial sintering conditions [30].
Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show the change of resistance for the WK^{®} and EA^{®} series commercial strain gages, respectively, as a function of time at 0.5 Hz cycling frequency. The results correspond to a strain of 862 με and 878 με, respectively, for a known GF of 2 provided by the manufacturer and Eq. (2). This strain is within 2% of each other. The strain measured by the commercial gages was different than that calculated using the beam theory [Eq. (1)] by about 13%. This difference is likely due to the variation in the beam properties and uncertainty in the cam rotation/follower movement, with the commercial gages providing the actual strain in the system.
B. Sensor sensitivity (gauge factor)
Once the strain gages were printed on the beam (process described in Fig. 1), it was deflected using the cam and the connector at 0.5 Hz. This resulted in periodic stress on the cantilever beam that caused a resistance change in the printed sensor electrodes as shown in Fig. 6(a). The change in the relative resistance as a function of time for 20 cycles is shown in Fig. 6(b). This result showed an excellent repeatability for five printed sensors and ensured a reliable and reproducible sensor signal. Figure 6(c) shows the relative resistance change as a function of strain with low variation between the sensors.
From Fig. 6(c), the gauge factor of the printed gages calculated using Eq. (2) is 3.15 ± 0.086, or 2.7% of the mean. This GF is higher than that for commercial gages. The GF of the printed sensors is given by
where ν is the effective Poisson ratio of the sensor film. The factor (1+2ν) is the contribution of the electrode shape change to the GF, and (dρ/ρ)/(dl/l) is the contribution of piezo-resistivity to GF. Note that the piezo-resistive effect could be positive or negative. Generally, the piezo-resistive effect in metals is small compared to semi-conductors [32]. Assuming a Poisson ratio of 0.5 during plastic deformation for bulk materials, the GF for the commercial metal gages is ∼2, indicating a negligible piezoresistive effect. In the case of Ag sensor on a soft polymer, Rausch et_al [33] estimated that the piezoresistive contribution to the GF was about -39%, which is attributed to damping behavior of the insulating polymer layer for that sensor. Lee et_al [34] have estimated the GF of laser direct write printed Ag to be 2.8. This points to about 28% contribution of the piezoresistive effect to the GF assuming a Poisson ratio of 0.5. In reality, however, the effective Poisson ratio for porous materials is likely to be higher than 0.5 (as shown later in this work), leading to a low piezoresistive effect of <20% of the GF for Ag. This indicates that the GF of 3.15 observed in this work cannot be explained by the piezoresistive effect of silver alone. From this observation and Eq. (3), the effective Poisson ratio of our film must be about 0.7 in order to explain the experimentally observed GF. It is interesting to note that several past works have shown that strain sensors with electrodes having sintered nanoparticle geometry can show higher sensitivity (i.e., GF) compared to the bulk sensors [17,35,36], a result similar to that in the current work. However, there is little understanding of why the Poisson ratio increases with porous film geometry. We develop a theoretical model to explain the same in Section III C.
C. Analytical modeling of the effective Poisson ratio and gauge factor
In order to answer the fundamental questions discussed above and obtain an effective Poisson ratio for porous films, we developed a model by considering the film as a cellular material. It is known that for cellular materials, geometric effects can give rise to their mechanical properties that are significantly different when compared to that for the bulk form [37]. Figure 7(a) shows the schematic of the porous film showing enhanced contraction under a uniaxial strain. The hypothesis is that the porous geometry leads to an effective Poisson ratio >0.5, i.e., an apparent reduction of the overall volume driven by partial or complete closing of the pores. Figure 7(b) shows the schematic of a fully dense film made of sintered nanoparticles. This film is expected to behave like a bulk material (under a load F in the vertical direction). In real sintered nanoparticle films, however, it is quite common to find missing grains (and hence porosity) due to inhomogeneous particle distribution, irregular grain growth, and the statistical nature of the sintering process as shown in the SEM image of Fig. 7(c) and the schematic in Fig. 7(d). Such a geometry is similar to a honeycomb structure having thick walls.
Figure 7(e) shows the relevant parameters for the model for the geometry and loading shown in Figs. 7(c) and 7(d). The porous film is stretched in Y direction, resulting in the length L_{AD} extending by 2δ with consequent change in length, L_{AB}, by δ_{AB}. Thus, geometrically, change in length δ and δ_{AB} for small displacements is related by
where sinθ=L_{y}L, cosθ=L_{x}L, and L=(Ly2+Lx2).
From Fig. 7(e), δ_{AB} can also be given by
which gives
Here, f is the component of force along “AB” [Fig. 7(f)]. Due to the porous geometry of the film, a change in length in X direction can be written as
where P is shown in Fig. 7(f). The deformation strain in the X and Y directions then becomes
Hence, the effective Poisson ratio can be written as
Considering the aspect ratio of the void area, α=L_{y}L_{x}, the effective Poisson ratio can be rearranged as
It is clear that the model developed in this section is highly dependent on the aspect ratio of the unit cell in the structure. Note that for different pore arrangements, the aspect ratio, α, can vary. The Poisson ratio as a function of α is shown in Fig. 8. To find the maximum value of ν^{*}, we set dν^{*}dα = 0. This situation corresponds to νmax*= 0.7698 and α=2 = 1.414 (θ=54.73^{o}). The results obtained above for the Poisson ratio of the porous film given by Eq. (11) can also be obtained by a different approach, considering forces along “AB” and “BC” and then displacement due to the forces. This approach is shown in the supplementary material, Sec. S1.
The analytical model above in Eq. (11) and Fig. 8 provides a very useful tool to find the effective Poisson ratio of porous films used for different applications. Considering the pore geometry shown in Fig. 7(d), it is likely that in the present case the ratio L_{y}L_{x} is close to 1.7, giving ν^{*} about 0.75. This value agrees reasonably well with that observed in the experiments described in Sec. III B.
Note that for the strain gauges made from bulk materials, the Poisson ratio is about 0.3–0.5. Considering the low piezoresistivity in metallic materials, this gives the GF of about 2. A Poisson ratio of 0.3 indicates dilatation in the film during deformation, while a Poisson ratio of 0.5 indicates plastic deformation where volume is conserved. In the case of sintered nanoparticle (NP) geometry with voids, the effective Poisson ratio of ∼0.75 indicates that the film undergoes an overall contraction when deformed, due to contracting pores. We have shown in the past that for printed nanoparticles, the void spaces can be modulated by varying the sintering conditions [20]. Theoretically, we can change the gauge factor by changing the density of the film, an area that will be part of a future investigation. Note that a Poisson ratio of greater than 1 was shown for polymer foams having a high void fraction [38]. The authors of this work [38], however, did not develop a model that could explain the high effective Poisson ratio and the resulting apparent volume contraction under a tensile load. We also note that the microstructure, being statistical in nature, will lead to the variation in the GF for a given process. We recognize that the model developed in this paper considers the sensor electrode as a freestanding film and ignores the effect of the substrate. The presence of the substrate can cause buckling or interfacial delamination of the film due to lateral contraction depending on the interface adhesion strength. In the present study, we have not observed delamination of the film from the H-cement.
The model developed in this section thus provides pathways to manipulate the film structure to achieve higher sensitivity for sensors. Figure 8 shows that the effective Poisson ratio increases up to α = 1.414 at which point it starts to decrease again. Away from the peak, on either side, the void shape is expected to change to oblong/elliptical shape. This means that for a very low or high aspect ratio an asymptotical behavior will be observed where the voids will appear as oblong cracks parallel or perpendicular to the loading direction, respectively. This indicates that the effective Poisson ratio given by Eq. (11) is highly directional and depends on the voids size, shape, and distribution. We conclude that 3-D printed and sintered NP films can provide superior strain sensing properties compared to that obtained from bulk materials.
D. High temperature behavior
Figures 9(a)–9(j) present the representative signal showing high temperature sensor output for temperatures from 25 °C to 500 °C, at intervals of 50 °C, respectively. The sensor signals showed repeatable sinusoidal behavior at all temperatures. However, as the temperature increased, the signal amplitude increased, implying that the signal was affected by factors other than applied mechanical strain. The sensor response recorded by the oscilloscope for four additional sensors is given in supplementary material, Figs. S2–S5. The relative change in sensor resistance as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. 10(a).
For high temperature sensors based on resistive change, the sensor outputs can be affected by several factors such as thermoresistivity of the sensor material and the thermal expansion mismatch of the sensor element/gage grid with the substrate. We can collectively call the effect of temperature alone on the resistance change and hence strain as apparent “thermal strain.” The apparent thermal strain can be expressed as [39]
where ΔRR0{T/O} is the unit resistance change from initial reference temperature due to temperature increase, β_{G} is the temperature coefficient of resistance of the sensor grid, GF represents the gauge factor of the sensor, K_{t} is the transverse sensitivity of the sensor, ν is the Poisson ratio, and α_{s}−α_{G} is thermal expansion coefficient mismatch between the substrate and sensor grid. From Fig. 10(a), the observed value of relative resistance change as a function of temperature is non-linear, and shows a polynomial fit. This can be understood from Eq. (12). The total thermal output is dependent on the collective thermal output of the sensor material, stainless steel substrate, and the H-cement coating. Factors presented in Eq. (12) for these materials are themselves function of temperature. Thus, the thermal output is expected to be a non-linear function of temperature as shown in Fig. 10(a). Such a type of non-linear behavior is observed in commercial strain sensors as well. We use Fig. 10(a) to find the experimentally measured apparent thermal strain as [39]
which is plotted in Fig. 10(b). While plotting Fig. 10(b), the experimental data from several commercial gages were also included (available up to 250 °C). The apparent thermal strain shown by the sensors in this study is comparable to self-compensated gages from the literature which involves a second sensor placed perpendicular to the primary sensor that compensates for the thermal drifts.
It was also observed that the apparent thermal strain calculated using Fig. 10(a) and Eq. (12) exhibits non-linear trend. Such non-linear behavior was also observed for commercial Constantan and self-compensated alloy strain gauges. It is thus clear that the printed sintered nanoparticle films in this study exhibit low thermal strain compared to the commercial strain gages and the trend is non-linear. Note that the error bars in Fig. 10(b) for the sensors in this study are not visible due to the scale of the graph. We have provided a separate graph in the supplementary material (Fig. S6) representing only the data for the sensors in this study where the error bars are apparent.
Although the apparent thermal strain consists of several factors, one possible reason for the low thermal drift could be that porous films [Figs. 4(a) and 4(b)] can accommodate additional thermal strains at elevated temperature due to their geometry compared to commercial gages. In the case of aluminum cellular foams, the effective coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) showed a hysteresis for a temperature range of 100–500 °C [40], with the material showing negative CTE from 400 to 450 °C. The hysteresis, however, was found to be a function of residual stress and phase transition in the foam [40]. In the present case, although the residual stress may affect the CTE, the porous geometry between the sintered grains [schematic shown in Fig. 7(d)] can potentially accommodate thermal strain, leading to a lower expansion and effective thermal strain for the film. It should be noted that at temperatures higher than 300 °C for Ag, the surface diffusion may become significant [41] and result in reduction in the pore sizes and thus reduce thermal strain. The investigation of this phenomenon is beyond the scope of the present work.
The thermal output can also affect the GF of the strain gage, as the GF is related to the relative resistance change and strain which varies due to the change in temperature. Figure 11 shows GF variation as a function of temperature which is less than 4% for temperatures up to 500 °C and exhibits a linear trend, and comparable to commercial gages.
The work presented in this paper accomplishes the design and manufacture of high GF strain sensors having low thermal strain compared to the commercially available strain gages, which is a great advantage in realizing next generation sensing and monitoring systems for high temperature applications. In general, the results also provide a useful framework to design materials and geometries to manufacture resistance-based sensors with superior high temperature performance. The manufacturing method proposed in this study allows the sensors to be printed anywhere, including over a curved, angled surface and can be integrated with other high temperature electronics in difficult-to-reach parts. The method is environmentally benign, creates less waste, and requires fewer steps compared to lithography based methods. The analytical model of the effective Poisson ratio for the sintered NP films also provides a powerful method to induce metamaterial-like behavior (e.g., Poisson ratio > 0.5) in porous films.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we use a nanoparticle-based 3D printing method to synthesize high temperature strain sensors that show stable and superior performance up to 500 °C. A high temperature strain sensing set up was built to characterize the sensor performance. The sensors were manufactured at an in-plane length scale of about 70 μm and an electrode length of about 6.5 mm. The sensors showed a gauge factor of 3.15 ± 0.086, which is higher than that of commercial strain gages. The gauge factor variation as a function of temperature was calculated to be less than 4% for up to 500 °C. We developed an analytical model which explains the higher gauge factor based on the higher effective Poisson ratio for the sintered nanoparticle-based porous films. A compensation chart was developed based on the high temperature output of the sensors which showed minimal thermal strain for the printed strain gages compared to the commercially available strain gages. Overall, the results presented here provide pathways to manufacture reliable strain sensors with superior sensing properties using nanoparticle based 3-D printing.
V. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
TABLE I. 
Printing parameters of the high temperature strain gauge.
TABLE I. -body
Sensor number	Printing parameters	Number of printed layer	Initial resistance of the sensors (Ω)	Gauge factor
Sheath gas pressure (sccm)	Atomizing pressure (sccm)
1	50	25	4	5.16	3.28
2	50	25	4	5.85	3.13
3	50	25	5	3.97	3.11
4	50	30	3	2.61	3.18
5	50	30	4	1.40	3.05
FIG. 1. 
Schematic of the substrate preparation and microadditive printing process of the high temperature sensor.
FIG. 2. 
(a) Schematic view of the experimental set up, (b) CAD model of the high temperature dynamic strain sensing set up, and (c) actual image of the strain sensing set up with the use of bent cantilever to measure strain.
FIG. 3. 
(a) Schematic view of a strain gauge printed onto a layer of H-cement on a cantilever beam. The beam is bent such that the strain sensitive direction undergoes a linear strain, (b) optical image of a printed strain gage with a gage length of 6.5 mm along with pads for electrical connections, (c) high magnification image of a part of the strain gage in (b), (d) width variation of the representative strain gauge taken along multiple electrodes, and (e) a representative 3-D profilometer scan showing the topography of a strain gage.
FIG. 4. 
Representative SEM images of the AJ printed Ag NP films. (a) Top surface morphology of the film sintered at 200 °C for 6.5 h, and (b) top surface morphology of the film (a), heated up to 500 °C.
FIG. 5. 
Change of resistance as a function of time due to applied mechanical load for the commercial strain gages, (a) resistance change for WK^{®} series commercial gage bonded to the stainless steel substrate, and (b) resistance change for the EA^{®} series commercial gauge bonded to the stainless steel substrate.
FIG. 6. 
(a) Resistance change of the AJ printed strain gages at room temperature as a function of time, (b) relative resistance change of the AJ printed strain gages at room temperature as a function of time, and (c) relative resistance change of the AJ printed strain gages at room temperature as a function of strain.
FIG. 7. 
(a) Schematic of the porous film under linear strain showing enhanced lateral contraction (Poisson ratio > 0.5). (b) A schematic of a fully dense film made of sintered nanoparticles, under load “F” in the vertical direction, (c) SEM micrograph of the sintered nanoparticle film showing missing grains/micro pores, the geometry is similar to cellular materials with thick walls, (d) a schematic of forces acting on a honeycomb like structure consisted with missing grains, (e) honeycomb structure under deformation, and (f) force acting on point A and B in (e).
FIG. 8. 
Change of the Poisson ratio as a function of aspect ratio, α. Poisson ratio is maximum at aspect ratio, α =1.414.
FIG. 9. 
High temperature output of a representative sensor (sensor number 1, Table I) as a function of time at 10 Hz. The data are presented at a 50 °C interval from room temperature to 500 °C. The output data presented in terms of voltage show a consistent and repeatable sensor signal at high temperatures.
FIG. 10. 
(a) Relative resistance change of the printed strain gage as a function of temperature showing a nonlinear fit of the relative resistance change as a function of temperature, (b) thermal strain as a function of temperature for the printed strain gage compared to the data available for the commercial strain gage from the literature (Ref [39]).
FIG. 11. 
Gauge factor variation as a function of temperature. The representative data show a linear increase in gauge factor as a function of temperature with less than 4% increase at 500 °C.
