Investigation on the optimized algorithm for electrostatic tomography
Particle charging in gas-solid two-phase flow is an important concern in many industrial processes. The technique of electrostatic tomography (EST) based on particle charging can achieve flow regime identification and infer concentration and flow rate by detecting the charged particles. Successful application of EST depends on the sensitivity map and the image reconstruction algorithm. In this paper, the effects of the sensitivity map on EST were demonstrated and a novel sensitivity map was presented. Then, optimized Tikhonov iterative algorithm (ITIK) was proposed to improve the quality of EST. The simulated results illustrate that the novel sensitivity map improves the quality of the reconstructed image of EST and the optimized ITIK has better performance in reconstructing the image of EST when compared with linearized back-projection algorithm, iterative linearized back-projection algorithm, and ITIK. Finally, the experimental studies were conducted and the simulated results were validated. The results indicate that the novel sensitivity map and the optimized algorithm can enable good applications of EST in gas-solid two-phase flow measurement.
I. INTRODUCTION
Gas-solid two-phase flow is a popular phenomenon in industrial and agricultural production processes. In gas-solid two-phase flow, particle charging generated by particle-wall, particle–particle, and particle–gas contacts is a universal phenomenon [1–3]. Based on the electrostatic charge induction principle, electrostatic sensor is presented to detect the moving charged particles, which has the advantage of cost-effectiveness, low maintenance requirement, easy installation, and suitability for application in a harsh environment [4–6]. With the progress of electrostatic sensor and tomography technology, a new tomography technology, namely, electrostatic tomography or electrodynamic tomography (EST), has been developed to achieve the visualization of the flow regimes, which can further infer other parameters such as the concentration and flow rate of gas-solid two-phase flow.
However, the available information on EST is limited, which equals to the electrode number of the electrostatic sensor arrays ( ESAs). It is evenly much less than the available information on other electrical tomography techniques such as electrical capacitance tomography (ECT), which equals to n(n − 1)/2 (n = electrode number) [7]. This shortcoming directly results in lower spatial resolution and accuracy of the reconstructed images of EST. To resolve this problem, many attempts have been performed. Green et_al developed a filtering method to modify the constructed images of EST, which needs to design different filterers for the different charge distributions to improve its accuracy [8]. Masashi and Brian and Zhou et_al made the investigation on the reduction of the pixels number to improve the accuracy of EST [9,10]. Machida et_al mapped the sensing area of the electrostatic sensors onto 11 and 18 pixels, respectively, which were equal to the number of the electrodes of the ESA. Zhou et_al designed the EST system with 8 electrodes, and they mapped the sensing area onto 9 and 17 pixels, respectively. Both of them found that reducing the pixels number was helpful to improve the accuracy of the EST. But this method made the spatial resolution of EST to be lower and hardly distinguish the flow regimes. Thuku et_al and Chen et_al proposed to increase the electrode number to improve the quality of the reconstructed image by EST [11,12]. And they both found that the increment of the electrode number was really beneficial to improve the quality of the reconstructed images of EST. But the increment of the electrode number inevitably results in the reduction of the area of each electrode, which would reduce the intensity of the electrostatic signals and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Actually, the current EST techniques all depend on the sensitivity map to achieve the image reconstruction of the charge distribution, which is an important factor to affect EST. However, the effect of the sensitivity map on EST is unknown. It is necessary to make further investigation on the impact of the sensitivity map on EST.
Moreover, the reconstructed algorithm is another important factor to affect EST. Like all other soft-field imaging techniques, EST has the disadvantage of being an ill-posed inverse problem. To overcome the ill-posed property, the regularization method is a powerful tool to resolve it, e.g., linearized back-projection algorithm (LBP), iterative linearized back-projection algorithm (ILBP), BP, LS, and so on [13–15]. The Tikhonov iterative algorithm (ITIK) is a good regularization method by virtue of its fast convergence speed in resolving the ill-posed inverse problem. Xu and Deshpande have successfully applied the Tikhonov iterative algorithm to capacitance tomography (ECT), and they found that the resolution improvement of over 2 times can be achieved with respect to conventional approaches [16]. Wang and Liu studied the application of Tikhonov iterative algorithm on the 2-D acoustic time travel time tomography, and they found that the Tikhonov iterative method had the better precision and convergence efficiency [17]. But the application of Tikhonov iterative method on EST is not found in the available literature. Considering the lower spatial resolution of all the electrical tomography techniques, the entropy thresholding method may be a good choice to improve it. Mwambela and Johansen have used the entropy thresholding method to modify the reconstructed images of ECT, and they found that it is a good complementary to improve the overall measurement results [18].
Above all, the application of EST technology is challenging due to the relatively lower spatial resolution and accuracy of the reconstructed images. The objective of the present study is to improve the quality of the reconstructed image, wherein both the sensitivity map and the reconstruction algorithm for EST are investigated. First, the effect of the sensitivity map on EST is demonstrated, and then, a novel sensitivity map is presented to perform on EST. Subsequently, the Tikhonov iterative algorithm combined with the entropy thresholding method are proposed to achieve the image reconstruction of EST and compared with other classical algorithms. Finally, the experimental results about the verification of the algorithm and the novel sensitivity map are presented.
II. PRINCIPLE OF EST
The electrostatic tomography system consists of an electrostatic sensor array, a data acquisition system, and a computer. The electrodes of ESA are uniformly mounted outside the circumference of a dielectric pipe which is transparent with respect to the electric field produced by the charged particles. Its configuration is shown in Fig. 1. The data acquisition system is used to amplify and sample the induced charges on the electrodes of ESA and transfers the data to a computer. The computer processes the data to achieve the image reconstruction of the charges distribution in the pipe.
The image reconstruction of EST includes two steps: first, modeling of the forward problem, which mainly establishes the relationship between the charge distribution over the cross section of the pipe and the induced charges on the electrodes of ESA, and second, solving the forward model, which achieves the image reconstruction of the charge distribution by virtue of the measurement values of the induced charge on ESA.
The mathematical model of the forward problem is shown in Eq. (1),
where (x, y) is the coordinate of the pixel, q_{i} is the induced charge on the ith electrode (i = 1, 2, …, N), g represents the charge in the pixel (x, y), D is the cross section area, and s_{i} denotes the sensitivity in pixel (x, y) of electrode j. Equation (1) can be discretized as
where s_{i,j} denotes the sensitivity in pixel i of electrode j, g_{i} denotes the charge in pixel i, q_{j} denotes the induced charge on electrode j, and n denotes the total number of pixels within the cross section of the pipe. Its matrix form is as follows:
where S denotes the sensitivity matrix, with each row of the matrix S representing the sensitivity map of one electrode of ESA; Q denotes the measurement values matrix of the induced charge on ESA; and G denotes the charge distribution matrix over the cross section of the pipe.
The EST aims to obtain the charge distribution over the cross section of the pipe. Namely, G is resolved from Eq. (3). The process of the image reconstruction of charge distribution is an inverse problem, which belongs to a classical ill-posed problem because the unknowns in G are greatly more than the measurement values Q. For the ill-posed problem, the regularization method is a powerful tool to resolve it, which includes two necessary factors: the sensitivity map and the regularization algorithm [19].
III. OPTIMIZED SENSITIVITY MAP OF EST
The sensitivity map works as the prior knowledge of EST, which can be calculated by the mathematical model of EST. The sensitivity maps used in EST can be divided into two kinds: the unit sensitivity map (USM) and the density sensitivity map (DSM), USM is decided by fixing 1 coulomb charge in the chosen pixel area and DSM is decided by fixing 1 C/m^{2} charge in the chosen pixel area [8,9]. Currently, all the sensitivity maps used in EST are calculated as either USM or DSM, but the effects of them on EST are unknown. Here, the effects of them on EST are first investigated.
Currently, most sensitivity maps of EST are all calculated from the equal-meshing method. Here, the sensing domain of ESA is mapped into 200 equal-triangle pixels, as shown in Fig. 2, which works as the representative of the equal-meshing method. In this paper, the simulated software is ANSOFT and the presetting error is 10^{−4} C. Because the area of every pixel equals each other for equal-triangle meshing, the sensitivity maps of both USM and DSM are similar, as shown in Fig. 3. Then, both sensitivity maps are used to reconstruct the images of four pre-established charge distributions by simulated data. The LBP algorithm is performed to reconstruct the charge distributions. In order to reduce the error of the reconstructed image, the induced charge on ESA q_{j} is always normalized as follows:
Then, the expression of LBP algorithm is as follows:
where S^{T} represents the transpose matrix of sensitivity matrix S, Q_{n} denotes the normalized induced charge matrix, and G is normalized to present the gray value of every pixel as follows:
where g_{max} denotes the maximum element in G. In order to improve the spatial resolution of the reconstructed image, the mesh subdivision method is adopted to draw the reconstructed results. Considering most tomography techniques mainly reconstruct the image by meshing it into 32 × 32 square pixels (total 1024 pixels) [20–23], in this paper, the image was meshed into 1100 triangular pixels.
The results are shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4, the color bar represents the range of the normalized gray value: 0 representing no charge and 1 representing the maximum charge value. From Fig. 4, the reconstructed images by DSM are visually better than the ones by USM for stratified and slug flow. But both of them are incorrect for ring-shape and core distributions. The results are attributed to the little independent information obtained by ESA, which is decided by the operational principle of ESA, and it is hard to change. But the meshing method of the pixels in the reconstructed image can be changed to improve the solving accuracy.
According to the characteristics of the sensitivity map of ESA in Fig. 3, the higher sensitivity of ESA is near the electrode and the lower sensitivity is in the central area of ESA. In this paper, an unequal-triangle meshing is proposed to improve the sensitivity in the center of ESA. The sensing domain of ESA is meshed into 160 as shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5 the pixels of the circumference remain unchanged as the ones in Fig. 2, but the pixels in the central area are enlarged.
The determined sensitivity maps are shown in Fig. 6. The reconstructed results are displayed in Fig. 7. By making a comparison for the reconstructed results in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c), the USM can successfully reconstruct stratified distribution, slug distribution, and core distribution apart from ring-shape distribution, and the DSM can successfully reconstruct the stratified distribution and slug distribution, but core and ring-shape distributions are unsatisfied.
To evaluate the effects of the sensitivity map on EST quantitatively, the correlation coefficient is introduced to evaluate the spatial similarity between the original image of charge distribution and the reconstructed one. It is defined in Eq. (8) [24],
The greater absolute value of the correlation coefficient represents the better reconstructed result.
The correlation coefficient analysis is performed for both 200 pixels and 160 pixels, as shown in Table I. In Table I, DSM200 represents DSM with 200 pixels and USM200 represents USM with 200 pixels, the same for DSM160 and USM160. According to the correlation coefficient in Table I, DSM160 has the better performance for stratified and slug distributions and USM160 has the better performance on the ring-shape and core distributions. Overall, USM160 has the better applicability for all distributions. Thus, the unequal mesh-based sensitivity map is effective on the improvement of EST.
However, the sensitivity map is just one factor to affect EST, whose improvement on the quality of the reconstructed images of EST is limited. An effective reconstruction algorithm is also an indispensable component to obtain the high-quality reconstructed image in addition to the optimized sensitivity map. Further investigation will focus on the reconstructed algorithms.
IV. OPTIMIZED ALGORITHM FOR EST
The Tikhonov iterative algorithm is one of the iterative regularization methods which has the advantage of fast convergence. Here, it is proposed to improve the image reconstruction quality of EST, whose theoretical expression is shown as follows [25]:
where α denotes the relaxation factor; I denotes the identity matrix; k denotes the iterative number; S denotes the sensitivity matrix of ESA; γ denotes the regularization coefficient, which affects the convergence speed greatly; now it is mainly decided by experience.
In this paper, a simple method of selecting the optimization γ is proposed. According to the Picard theorem of singular system, Eq. (9) can be translated to Eq. (10) [26],
where μ_{i}/(γ + μ_{i}^{2}) is the regularization filter, μ_{i} represents the singular value of S, and ⟨ΔQ_{k}, y_{i}⟩x_{i} denotes the error of every iteration. Obviously the error can be reduced just when μ_{i}/(γ + μ_{i}^{2}) < 1, and then the solution of the inverse problem can be convergent. Based on the above theoretical analysis, the maximum one of the singular values of the sensitivity matrix S was chosen as the regularization coefficient, γ = μ_{max}. Therefore, the denominator of 1/(μ_{max}/μ_{i} + μ_{i}) is bigger than 1(μ_{i} > 0), which can effectively reduce the error of every iteration and achieve stable convergence for the image reconstruction of EST.
Furthermore, to eliminate the smoothing effect of reconstruction algorithm for EST, the entropic thresholding method is proposed to modify the results of the Tikhonov iterative algorithm; its detail can be referred to in Ref [27]. The method transforms the original gray level tomogram into a binary tomogram represented by the function b(x, y) through selecting a thresholding gray level s, which is denoted in Eq. (11),
The thresholding gray level s is determined by the maximum entropy principle. The total entropy of the cross-sectional gray of EST is defined as
where P_{S}=∑i=1Sp_{i}, p_{i} is the probability of the ith gray levels; s denotes the thresholding gray level that can be used to distinguish the charged particle and gas, which is calculated by determining the maximum of HT; and n is the total number of the gray levels. In this paper, n = 10. The Tikhonov iterative algorithm equipped with the entropic thresholding method is defined as XTIK in the context of this paper for convenience.
In order to evaluate the performance of the optimized Tikhonov iterative algorithm on EST, the images reconstructed by the algorithms including the linearized back-projection algorithm (LBP), iterative linearized back-projection algorithm (ILBP), and Tikhonov iterative algorithm (ITIK) are compared and analyzed.
In this section, four pre-established charge distributions are reconstructed. And the simulated data are contaminated with 10% noise for all algorithms to reconstruct the charge distributions. According to Sec. III, DSM160 and USM160 are chosen to work as the prior knowledge of different charge distributions. In practical application, the signals from every electrode equal each other for core distribution and ring-shape distribution. Therefore, the proper sensitivity map can be chosen for different charge distributions through analyzing the signal intensity of ESA.
In this paper, all iterative algorithms stop at the 100th iterative step. The reconstructed results are shown in Fig. 8. From these reconstructed images, it can be visually found that (1) all algorithms can get satisfied results for stratified, slug, and core distributions but poor result for ring-shape distribution; (2) the iterative algorithm ILBP and ITIK can get higher quality tomograms compared with LBP in spite of a little smoothing effects; and (3) the XTIK algorithm can reduce the smoothing effects and greatly improve the quality of the reconstructed images. Moreover, the reconstructed images of the two flow patterns of ring-shape and core distributions are almost the same. It is explained that both the flow patterns are completely symmetrical on the cross section of the pipeline and the information obtained from each electrode is exactly the same; the EST reconstructs the similar images for both flow patterns of ring-shape and core distributions except the charge density and charge distribution area. Take the reconstructed results by ITIK for example, the charge density of the ring-shape distribution ranges from 0.1137 C/pixel to 0.4524 C/pixel over the entire cross section. And the charge density of the core distribution ranges from 0.045 C/pixel to 0.181 C/pixel over the entire cross section. Obviously the charge density distributions of them are different. XTIK eliminates the smoothing effect of the reconstructed results by ITIK and improves the identification of the charge distribution, and the charge density equals each other (1 C/pixel) for both ring-shape and core distributions reconstructed by XTIK due to the binary effect of the entropic threshold method.
The quantitative evaluation results of the reconstructed images shown in Fig. 8 are listed in Table II. The detailed thresholding levels determined by the entropy thresholding method are reported in Table III. From Table II, it can be found that (1) the iterative algorithms (ILBP, ITIK) can get the better similarity (R_{xy}) for stratified and slug distributions but have no advantage for core and ring-shape distributions compared with the one-step algorithm (LBP); (2) for the iterative algorithms, ITIK can get better reconstruction results for stratified, slug, and core distributions than ILBP with the same iterative steps, namely, ITIK has the faster convergence speed than ILBP; and (3) XTIK can greatly reduce the error of the reconstructed images and improve the spatial resolution.
V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
A. Pulley experiment
In this paper, a purpose-built experimental test rig is designed to evaluate the reconstruction algorithms. The schematic diagram of the experimental test rig is shown in Fig. 9. A rubber V-belt is winded around two pulleys, one of which is driven by a DC motor. A brush is attached to the V-belt so that the triboelectric charge is generated when the belt rubs with it. The charged belt is used to simulate a stream of charged particles moving along the axial direction, and the position of the charged belt within the sensor can be changed by adjusting the support stand of the sensor. ESA with eight electrodes is designed to acquire the electrostatic signals; the diameter of the pipe is 60 mm. The data collection system consists of the current amplifier circuit, a data acquisition card (PCI9112), and a computer. The sampling rate is 1500 Hz for each electrode of ESA, and the SNR is 19 dB.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 10. Three kinds of charge distributions are reconstructed by XTIK using USM160. From Fig. 10, it is obvious that XTIK can get satisfied reconstructed images. For the charged belt in the center of ESA, the reconstructed image is greater than the cross-sectional area of the charged belt due to the larger pixels in the center of ESA and the radial vibration of the charged belt.
B. Pneumatic conveying experiment
In order to make further evaluation on the performance of the reconstruction algorithm, the dense-phase pneumatic conveying experiment was conducted. Figure 11 shows the schematic diagram of the high pressure dense-phase pneumatic conveying system, which consists of five parts including gas source, hopper, conveying pipeline, sensors, and data collection system. The operational principle of the conveying system used in this paper is described by Zhou et_al [28] In the experiments, electrical capacitance tomography (ECT) was employed to obtain the flow regime of gas-solid flow. The ECT sensor and ESA sensor were mounted on the horizontal test part of the conveying system. The structural parameters of the ECT sensor and ESA sensor are described by Gao et_al [29]
In the experiment, the lignite coal powder with mean particle diameter of 161.7 μm was conveyed, whose moisture is 17.76% and density is 1350 kg/m^{3}. Four conditions were tested through adjusting the total conveying pressure difference by maintaining the pressure in the receiving hopper and increasing the pressure in the feeding hopper. The detailed operational parameters are listed in Table IV.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 12. Figure 12(a) shows the flow regimes of pulverized coal by ECT, whose color represents the volume concentration of the pulverized coal; from left to right, the flow regime is from conditions 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. From Fig. 12(a), it is found that the particles mainly settle at the bottom of the pipe to flow and more particles flow in the cross section of the pipe with the increment of the pressure difference from condition 1 to condition 4. Figures 12(b) and 12(c) show the images reconstructed by EST; both of them get the similar flow regimes as the ones by ECT. Furthermore, the variable trend of the flow regimes can be obviously found from Fig. 12(c). The correlation coefficients between Figs. 12(a) and 12(c) are within 0.78–0.84. The results confirm the feasibility of the novel algorithm on the identification of the flow regimes of the solid particles by EST.
VI. CONCLUSION
Both the sensitivity map and the reconstruction algorithm are important factors to ensure the reconstructed image quality of EST. A novel sensitivity map and an optimized reconstruction algorithm were proposed in this study. Both theoretical and experimental evaluations were performed. The results have shown that the proposed sensitivity map of the unequal-triangle mesh can improve the image reconstruction quality of the charge distribution and DSM160 and USM160 fit to the image reconstruction of different charge distributions. The optimized Tikhonov iterative algorithm is proved to have superior image quality when compared with LBP, ILBP, and ITIK for EST. The combination of the novel sensitivity map and optimized Tikhonov iterative algorithm is proved to enable the good applications of EST in gas-solid two-phase flow measurement. The future work will focus on the data fusion of multi-tomography and the optimization of the unequal-mesh sensitivity map to improve the accuracy of the electrostatic tomography.
TABLE I. 
Correlation coefficient analysis.
TABLE II. 
Correlation coefficient of different algorithms.
TABLE III. 
Thresholding gray level of XTIK.
TABLE IV. 
Test conditions.
TABLE I. -body
	Stratified	Slug	Core	Ring-shape
DSM200	0.8489	0.7924	0.0071	−0.0109
USM200	0.8527	0.7962	−0.3259	0.1891
DSM160	0.9161	0.8689	0.0046	−0.0015
USM160	0.8364	0.8353	0.9127	−0.6624
TABLE II. -body
Algorithm	Stratified	Slug	Core	Ring-shape
LBP	0.862	0.828	0.912	−0.662
ILBP	0.926	0.869	0.801	−0.712
ITIK	0.969	0.953	0.912	−0.662
XTIK	0.992	0.998	1	−0.500
TABLE III. -body
Charge distribution	Stratified	Slug	Core	Ring-shape
Thresholding gray level	4	4	5	6
TABLE IV. -body
	Pressure in buffer	Pressure in feeding	Pressure in receiving	Superficial	Mass
Condition	tank (MPa)	hopper (MPa)	hopper (MPa)	velocity (m/s)	flux (kg/s)
1	4	2.8	2.5	4.66	0.112
2	4	3	2.5	5.91	0.162
3	4	3.25	2.5	6.5	0.216
4	4	3.5	2.5	7.56	0.256
FIG. 1. 
Electrostatic sensor arrays.
FIG. 2. 
Equal-triangle mesh.
FIG. 3. 
Sensitivity map for the equal-triangle mesh: (a) unit sensitivity map (USM) and (b) density sensitivity map (DSM).
FIG. 4. 
Reconstructed images for different sensitivity maps: (a) pre-established charge distributions, in turn from left to right it is stratified, slug, ring-shape, and core distributions, (b) reconstructed images by DSM, and (c) reconstructed images by USM.
FIG. 5. 
Unequal-triangle mesh.
FIG. 6. 
Sensitivity map for unequal-triangle mesh: (a) unit sensitivity map (USM) and (b) density sensitivity map (DSM).
FIG. 7. 
Reconstructed images for different unequal-triangle sensitivity maps: (a) the reestablished charge distributions, in turn from left to right it is stratified, slug, ring-shape, and core distributions, (b) reconstructed images by DSM, and (c) reconstructed images by USM.
FIG. 8. 
Image reconstruction results by different algorithms: (a) preestablished charge distributions, (b) LBP, (c) ILBP, (d) ITIK, and (e) XTIK.
FIG. 9. 
(a) Schematic diagram of the experimental test rig and (b) cross section of the belt.
FIG. 10. 
Experimental results. (a) Charged belt positions and (b) reconstructed results by XTIK.
FIG. 11. 
Test rig schematic of dense-phase pneumatic conveying under high pressure: (1) motor-drive control valve, (2) weigh cell, (3) hopper, (4) pressurizing gas, (5) fluidizing gas, (6) supplemental gas, (7) buffer tank, (8) nitrogen cylinders, (9) horizontal test section, (10) data acquisition, and (11) computer.
FIG. 12. 
Flow regimes at four conditions. (a) Images reconstructed by ECT, (b) images reconstructed by ITIK, and (c) images reconstructed by XTIK.
