A 532 nm fiber-optic displacement interferometer for low-velocity impact experiments
Conventional fiber-optic displacement interferometers operated at 1550 nm suffer from low temporal or velocity resolution for lower velocity measurements. To overcome this drawback, a fiber-optic Doppler pin system operated at 532 nm is developed, and its capability is demonstrated with low-velocity plate impact experiments. The new instrument would be an important supplemental to the existed systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Velocity interferometer system for any reflector (VISAR) [1,2] and its improved variations has historically been a working horse of shock wave physics. It operates at a visible wavelength, and excellent temporal and velocity resolutions are achieved with fast detectors and oscilloscopes with relatively low bandwidths (sub-GHz). In recent years, all-fiber displacement interferometers have become popular, have the advantages of measuring absolute velocity, and overcome the VISAR’s drawback of fringe loss. These systems use optical fibers and ultrafast detectors developed in telecommunication, and oscilloscopes with ultrahigh bandwidth, and are referred to as photonic Doppler velocimeter (PDV) [3,4], heterodyne-velocimeter (Het-V) [5], or displacement interferometer system for any reflector (DISAR) [6,7] in the literature with minor differences in configuration and implementation. Since all optical paths of such an interferometer are confined in optic fibers, it is relatively easy to operate and maintain and can be readily multiplexed. It operates with 1550 nm fiber lasers which have been well optimized for fiber communications and finds its applications in shock experiments for measuring wave structures, phase transitions, and the Hugoniot equations of state [8].
On the other hand, several studies [4,9,10] have discussed the accuracy of this kind of instrumentation and the difficulty of resolving low velocity at a given temporal resolution. It is commonly recognized that fringe patterns of a displacement interferometer obtained in low-velocity impact experiments (e.g., below 150 m/s) cannot be correctly resolved by the short-time Fourier transformation (STFT) [11] with a sliding window less than 10 ns in width [9,12]. Although a frequency-conversion method can shift the Doppler frequency to higher values for a better signal-to-noise ratio [5,9], an additional single-frequency low-noise laser operating at lower fundamental frequency is required as the reference, so alternative schemes are desirable.
II. THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE AND VELOCITY ACCURACY
The Doppler shift in the frequency of probe light reflected from a target moving at a constant velocity v toward the observer is
where λ_{0} is the wavelength of the original probe or reference light (frequency f_{0}). When this Doppler-shifted light recombines with the reference light, their interference results in fringes with the frequency given by Eq. (1). f_{d} can be resolved via the fast Fourier transformation of recorded time series, and v is determined. In most shock experiments, velocity v varies with time, which leads to the temporal evolution of frequency exhibited in the recorded fringe patterns. We denote light intensity (voltage) as a function of the time as S(t).
STFT is routinely applied to analyze fringe patterns to obtain an average frequency within a sliding time window of width τ. The Fourier transformation of a time series S(t) is given by [9]
from which one can obtain the Doppler shift at instant t¯. The window function w limits Fourier transformation to the sliding window centered at t¯, i.e., w = 0 for t−t¯≥12τ (boxcar windows).
Within a time window, an average frequency can be obtained from the power spectrum, S̃{2}(f). For perfect fringe quality, uncertainty in frequency Δf and τ obeys the Garbor’s uncertainty principle [11],
Differentiating Eq. (1), we obtain from Eq. (3) the relationship between velocity uncertainty (Δv) and τ as [4]
Equations (3) and (4) suggest that Δf depends on window width τ but not on wavelength, while Δv depends on both τ and laser wavelength λ_{0}. At a given τ, Δv increases with increasing probe light wavelength. For example, τ = 10 ns yields a minimal Δf of 0.05 GHz for λ_{0} = 1550 nm or 532 nm. However, the minimum of Δv is 39 m/s for λ_{0} = 1550 nm and 13.3 m/s for λ_{0} = 532 nm. Accordingly, time resolution or velocity resolution can be improved when a 532 nm laser is adopted instead of a 1550 nm laser.
For a 1550 nm fiber-optic displacement interferometer, its signal level is comparable to background noise at low velocities, e.g., below 150 m/s. For a given velocity, the amount of Doppler shift increases with decreasing wavelength of the probe laser. For instance, f_{d} for 532 nm is about three times that for 1550 nm, so the signal-to-noise ratio is increased accordingly. To achieve higher temporal/velocity resolution, and signal-to-noise ratio, we propose a fiber-optic displacement interferometer operated at 532 nm for low-velocity impact experiments.
III. INSTRUMENT DESCRIPTION
The layout of the 532 nm and 1550 nm Doppler pin system [referred to as Visible Doppler pin system (V-DPS) and Non-visible Doppler pin system (N-DPS), respectively] is schematically shown in Fig. 1. V-DPS consists mainly of a coherent 532 nm laser (Verdi V5), a single-mode (SM) optical fiber, a 2 × 2 SM optical fiber coupler with 50:50 division ratio (Thorlabs TN532R5A2), focusing lenses, precision stages, and a fast detector (Thorlabs APD430A2, DC-400 MHz bandwidth). The current 5-W 532 nm laser used in this study was originally intended for VISAR. A compact coherent laser module with 50 mW output power and 5 MHz linewidth is more desirable and is commercially and economically available. N-DPS mainly consists of a 1550 nm optical fiber laser (NKT Koheras Boostik, operated at 80 mW, linewidth 1 kHz), a SM optical fiber, a SM circulator, and a fast detector with a frequency bandwidth of 12.5 GHz.
The 532 nm laser beam is injected into one leg of the fiber coupler through an achromatic lens (focal length f = 75 mm) with a coupling efficiency of ∼2%. This laser beam is split equally by the coupler. One half is guided to the target via an optical fiber (3 m long), and another half is blocked (the dumb arm). Both the signal light reflected from the target and the reference light reflected from the end face of the optical fiber are collected by the same fiber and retro-transmitted to the fiber coupler. The collection efficiency is about 1%–3%. The signal light and reference light are output from another leg of the fiber coupler and coupled into the detector via one pair of achromatic lenses. The SM optical fiber serves as a mode selector which allows one mode of light for further propagating. Hence, coherent beating is automatically assured at the detector. Only ∼40 mW laser power is needed to generate fringes with amplitudes on the 100 mV order for dynamic experiments due to the high sensitivity of the detector.
In this Doppler pin system (DPS) design, both the signal light and reference light are transmitted through the same fiber-optic path before reaching the detector. In this way, the light signals sense the same amount of optical birefringence variation in the fiber caused by external mechanical stresses; the optical path difference is zero, and no fringe or intensity variation is induced. Hence, the fiber birefringence effect by external stresses can be canceled. This design makes the interferometer less sensitive to mechanical disturbance which can be serious in the target chamber of a gun driven by high-pressure gas or powder explosive. Static checks had been done for the above DPS and a fiber displacement interferometer with a fiber optic path similar to those in the literature [5,6], where the reference light is taken directly from the laser source by a fiber coupler (divider) and combined with the signal light via another fiber coupler before directing to the detector. Two kinds of experiments are performed: outputs are recorded with an oscilloscope while the fibers are under shaking by hand or DPS output is recorded by striking the target with a hammer while shaking the optical fiber (Fig. 2). In the fiber-shaking experiment, DPS outputs steady lines with no fringes, while the fiber displacement interferometer outputs distinct fringe patterns due to optical birefringence generated in the fiber when subjected to external stress. In the target-striking experiment, a stress wave is generated and propagates through the target. DPS fringe appears when the wave arrives at the free surface. Before that, DPS output is stable. These observations demonstrate that the optical birefringence effect generated in the DPS fiber is effectively eliminated.
IV. VALIDATION EXPERIMENT
To demonstrate the feasibility and capability of the V-DPS, a validation experiment is conducted on our single-stage gas gun with a bore diameter of 28.6 mm × 5 m long. This gun launches a projectile by compressed gas (air, N_{2} or He), and only one acceleration stage is used. The experimental setup for symmetric impact is also shown in Fig. 1. Stainless steel (304SS) disks are used as flyer plates and targets. Their diameters are 26.80 mm, and thicknesses are 2.931 mm and 2.831 mm, respectively. The flyer plate is launched to a desired velocity and impacts the target in a target chamber evacuated to several Pa prior to experiment. Two optical pins (optical fiber ferrules with a diameter of 2.5 mm) are adopted for simultaneous V-DPS and conventional N-DPS measurements. Impact velocity is measured with an optical beam block system. The two optical pins are set 1 mm laterally away from the central axis and 0.3 mm longitudinally away from the back surface of the target (the surface opposite to the impact surface; Fig. 1). Two SM optical fibers are used to deliver laser light from the V-DPS and the N-DPS, and transmit back signals from the target. Fringe patterns of the V-DPS and N-DPS in the dynamic experiment are recorded with a digital oscilloscope with a bandwidth of 4 GHz and sampling rate of 40 GS/s. One electric shorting pin is set near the target edge for triggering the oscilloscope.
Fringe patterns obtained with V-DPS and N-DPS are plotted in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). Insets show an enlarged view of the fringe patterns for the first 40 ns, which have 4.5 and 1.5 cycles for V-DPS and N-DPS, respectively. According to the analysis of Hsieh and Saberi [13], at least two cycles are required to precisely resolve the frequency with the STFT method. In practice, only one cycle is sufficient to resolve a frequency peak. Frequency spectrograms are obtained from the fringe data via the STFT with two Hann window functions (τ = 38.4 ns and τ = 16 ns), as shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), respectively. In Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), the color bars denote power intensity deduced with the STFT. White thin curves are the positions of maxima in power intensity at a given instant, for V-DPS and N-DPS, and two different τ-values. While the velocity signal is clearly separated from background noise in the V-DPS spectrogram, the background noise level is only slightly lower than but still commensurate with the velocity signal for N-DPS [τ = 16 ns, see Fig. 3(c)]. As expected, the frequency at the maximum intensity for V-DPS is approximately three times that for N-DPS [Fig. 3(d)]. For a similar spectrogram signal-to-noise ratio, V-DPS has higher time resolution (τ = 16 ns) than N-DPS (τ = 38.4 ns).
Relative power intensity versus frequency deduced from the fringe data in the time durations of 0–16 ns and 0–38.4 ns is plotted in Figs. 3(e) and 3(f), respectively. For τ = 16 ns, the N-DPS signal is completely mixed into the background noise (red triangles), the V-DPS signal shows clear peak, and its position can be resolved by fitting the data (blue squares) with a Gaussian function (f_{2} = 120.8 MHz). In the case of τ = 38.4 ns, both signals show clear peaks, and fitting to these peaks yields f_{1} = 48.6 MHz and f_{2} = 119.4 MHz. Given these frequency values, free-surface velocities are determined as 32.1 m/s, 37.7 m/s, and 31.1 m/s, respectively. The arrows indicate the minimum Δf values calculated by Eq. (3).
The extracted velocity versus time curves from V-DPS and N-DPS are compared in Fig. 4, where the inset shows a magnified view of the first 100 ns segment. A two-wave structure is observed in both cases, with the elastic–plastic transition initiated at the Hugoniot elastic limit (HEL), along with a well-defined shock plateau. The peak free-surface velocity is 110.8 ± 0.5 m/s, consistent with the impact speed 115.5 ± 0.6 m/s measured independently by an optical beam block system. The first several data points right after the velocity jump deviate from the extrapolation from the higher velocity data (the tilted dashed line) due to the averaging effect associated with τ. The deviation is more pronounced for τ = 38.4 ns. The extrapolation results in a HEL value of 38.0 m/s for our 304SS sample, similar to a literature result of 36.0 m/s for the 304L stainless steel [14]. Hence, the first velocity jump determined by V-DPS with τ = 16 ns is closer to HEL.
In Fig. 4, the starting points of the three curves are different due to the average effect within the sliding window τ. At the starting point t = 0 ns in the case of τ = 38.4 ns, STFT is performed on the fringe data taken from −19.2 ns to 19.2 ns. Only the background shows in the period from −19.2 ns to 0 ns. The Doppler-shifted signal begins to generate beat fringes after time zero (from 0 to 19.2 ns). V-DPS data show 1.5 cycles of fringes in this time period, which is sufficient to resolve a frequency peak. So the first velocity data point appears at t = 0 ns. On the other hand, N-DPS data have only 0.5 cycles of fringes which is insufficient to resolve the frequency peak. The overlap of the STFT operations is 34τ. When t shifts to 9.6 ns, the N-DPS data show more than one fringe. As a result, the frequency peak is resolved. The first velocity data point appears at t = 9.6 ns. Similarly, in the case of τ = 16 ns, when t shifts to 8 ns, the V-DPS data display more than one fringe, so the first frequency peak can be resolved and the first velocity data point appears at t = 8 ns.
V. SUMMARY
In summary, an all-fiber displacement interferometer operated at 532 nm for low velocity measurements is designed, fabricated, and demonstrated with a planar impact experiment. The new visible instrument is a supplemental to rather than in substitution of the existed near-infrared PDV or Het-V or DISAR interferometers. Compared to previous systems, it can output fringe patterns with a higher frequency approximately by three times and better temporal/velocity resolution can be achieved. In addition, the instrument with a single fiber-optic path for transmitting both signal and reference light is less sensitive to external disturbance compared to those systems with two separate fiber-optic paths. Such a feature makes the interferometer more useful where mechanical disturbance is considerable as in the target chamber of a gun driven by high-pressure gas or powder explosives. This visible wavelength displacement interferometer is advantageous for low-velocity impact experiments, for example, for exploring elastic-plastic transitions.
FIG. 1. 
Schematics of impact configuration and two Doppler pin systems operated at the 532 nm and 1550 nm wavelengths denoted as V-DPS and N-DPS, respectively. Light reflected from end surfaces of the optical pins is used as the reference light. 304SS: 304 stainless steel flyer plate and target. See text for more details.
FIG. 2. 
Comparison of fringe patterns from DPS in static check experiments with different optical paths. The dashed red line is the output of a fiber displacement interferometer (FDI) with an optical path similar to those in the literature when the fibers are under shaking. The solid black line is the output of DPS with the optical path shown in Fig. 1 when the fibers are under shaking, and the dash-dotted blue line is its output when the target is stroked.
FIG. 3. 
[(a) and (b)] Fringe patterns of V-DPS and N-DPS voltage signal histories. Insets: enlarged view of the first 40 ns signals. [(c) and (d)] Corresponding frequency spectra obtained by the STFT with τ = 16 ns and τ = 38.4 ns, respectively. [(e) and (f)] Power intensity versus frequency deduced from the fringe data in time intervals from 0 to 16 ns and 0–38.4 ns, respectively. Peak positions f_{1} and f_{2} are determined by fitting the data with a Gaussian function (solid lines). Arrows indicate the minimum Δf values calculated with Eq. (3).
FIG. 4. 
Comparison of velocity histories measured by N-DPS and V-DPS. The inset is a magnified view of the initial 100 ns segment obtained at different τ-values as noted. HEL: Hugoniot elastic limit. The vertical dashed line denotes an ideal elastic wave, and the titled dashed line refers to the unsmeared plastic rise.
