Electrostatic forces acting on particle image velocimetry tracer particles in a plasma actuator flow
Dusty plasma effects were investigated for the results of plasma actuator particle image velocimetry experiments. Two particle charging theories, partially collisional and fully collisional theories, are used to estimate the charge on the particles. Secondary aerodynamic forces are shown to be weak in comparison to Stokes drag, and secondary dusty plasma effects are also weak compared to the electrostatic force. It is shown that the true air velocity can be calculated by extrapolating to the 0-nm particle size. Using the difference in velocity between the air and the particles, the Stokes drag force is calculated and found to be between 1 and 200 pN depending on particle size. The electrostatic force is also calculated and found to be almost equal and opposite to Stokes drag, but the charge and electric field components cannot be separated. Based on assumptions from published simulation results, the theories are shown to be within a factor of two in predicting the charge on a particle in a high pressure plasma.
INTRODUCTION
Plasma actuators are lightweight, electrically driven, thin devices that can be placed on a surface in order to alter airflow. They have no moving parts, relying instead, on high voltage and electric fields to induce airflow in the boundary layer. A schematic of a simple plasma actuator representative of the one used in the experiments is shown in Fig. 1. Two metal electrodes are placed on opposite sides of a dielectric sheet such that one starts where the other ends. The electrodes are usually thin metal strips, less than a millimeter thick but about a centimeter in width. Copper or aluminum tape is usually the material of choice since it comes prepackaged in correct dimensions and can be easily cut to alter designs. The dielectric can be made of any material that can withstand breakdown in the presence of strong electric fields: glass, printed circuit boards, acrylic, or polyimide. The electrodes connect to a high voltage AC power supply with usual operating frequencies in the range of a few thousand Hz (1 kHz–10 kHz) and voltages in thousands of volts peak to peak (>10 kV_{pp}).
Plasma actuators use the principles of dielectric barrier discharge to ionize air between the two electrodes. The discharge requires the use of high voltage to surpass the 3 MV/m breakdown threshold of air. At the same time, the dielectric stops the transmission of DC power and lowers the power requirement to sustain the plasma.
Plasma actuators induce airflow downstream, which creates a negative pressure differential that pulls air down from above the plasma actuator. They have been found to increase the lift, decrease the drag, and increase the critical angle of attack on airfoils [1]. They can be placed on vertical axis wind turbines to increase power output, while consuming only a fraction of extra power [2]. And they can change the shock structure of a projectile [3]. Corke et_al reviewed the plasma actuator operation, optimization, and modeling [4]. Geometric and plasma effects have been researched by Enloe et_al [5,6] They found that the plasma is filamentary during the positive voltage portion of the cycle and diffuse during the negative voltage portion of the cycle. Thinner electrodes produced a higher thrust, which is attributed to stronger electric fields due to geometric gradient effects.
Plasma actuator performance can be characterized by the induced air speed. Particle image velocimetry (PIV) is a flow measurement technique that can determine the instantaneous velocity field by cross-correlating images of tracer particles that are following the flow. PIV has been used extensively in studying plasma actuator flow, and Kotsonis gives an extensive review of experimental investigations on plasma actuator flow [7]. A few notable works are included here. Murphy et_al conducted phase-locked PIV experiments to characterize velocity and force production of plasma actuators and found that they both have a power law dependence on the voltage, frequency, and dielectric thickness [8]. Balcon et_al quantified the differences between a positive and a negative sawtooth input signal [9]. Negative sawtooth signals induced a slimmer velocity profile with a faster maximum velocity than the positive signal. Kotsonis and Ghaemi extended the comparison to include sine and square waves and used a high speed PIV system that was capable of discerning 48 different phases from the voltage cycle [10]. The temporal and spatial resolution allowed for calculating the acceleration field of the flow.
The PIV experiments mentioned above have two things in common. First, each of the studies showed that plasma actuators induce a faster airflow during the transition from positive to negative voltage, which is attributed to the electronegativity of oxygen.
Simulations by Likhanskii et_al [11] and Boeuf et_al [12] predict a large density of negative oxygen ions during the negative voltage portion of the cycle. Font et_al experimentally researched the effect of oxygen on plasma actuator operation by placing the actuator in a vacuum chamber and varying the amount of oxygen [13]. Using a torsional spring and mirrors, they measured the deflection of a laser beam to calculate the force production of a plasma actuator. For the dry air run (80% nitrogen, 20% oxygen), they found that the majority of the force was produced during the transition from positive to negative voltage, and only a weak force was observed during the transition to a positive voltage. The chemical makeup of the surrounding fluid is very important for plasma actuator operations.
The second commonality of the PIV experiments is that dusty plasma effects, such as particle charging, were not considered when calculating the velocity field of plasma actuators. PIV determines the displacement of particles as opposed to the actual air velocity field. Usually, PIV is used in flow that does not have plasma, and as such, dusty plasma effects do not exist.
Dusty plasma is the study of the dynamics and interactions of small dust grains immersed within a plasma. The most important quantity in dusty plasma is the charge on the particles, which will be covered in more detail in the “Particle Charging” section. Other effects include potential distributions, ion drag force, and inter-particle interactions. Khrapak and Morfill reviewed these effects in detail, but for plasma actuators, these effects are weak [14].
Plasma actuators create a 3 MV/m electric field in order to initiate plasma formation. The simulations by Boeuf et_al predicted electric field magnitudes of around 1 MV/m. Particle charging and strong electric fields give rise to significant electrostatic forces that prevent particles from properly tracing the airflow. Moghadden et_al [15] corrected for these effects in airflow induced by corona discharge by using multiple particle sizes and models predicting particle charge. For plasma actuators, Boucinha et_al [16] conducted laser Doppler velocimetry with different particles and compared the results to Pitot tube measurements to show significant differences in velocity. However, their work was a preliminary study and did not expand on the effects. This work expands on particle charging investigations in plasma actuator flow by comparing different sized particle velocities to determine the electrostatic force acting on the particles and comparing particle charging models in the literature.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To determine the effect of particle charging, PIV experiments were conducted using differently sized particles. The experiment and the results are discussed in more detail in a previous work [17], so only a summary is provided here.
The plasma actuator was operated with a sine wave at 2 kHz and 4.5 kV_{rms}. A high speed PIV system was used to capture phase-locked images for 25 different phases of the voltage cycle. Experiments were performed in a closed box using a monodisperse distribution of particle diameters. Particle diameters varied from 300 nm to 1250 nm, which represent the smallest particle that can be detected in PIV and the largest particle capable of accurately tracing non-ionized air flow oscillating at 2 kHz.
Figure 2 shows the velocity field for 700 nm particles at 264° phase angle, which is representative of plasma actuator flow; plasma actuators accelerate flow downstream and pull in flow from the top. The origin is set as the top electrode edge. The results show significant differences between the velocities of differently sized particles, especially during the positive voltage portion of the cycle (0°–180°). Larger particle velocities differed more from the true air velocity compared to smaller particles.
Figure 3 shows the x-direction velocity of 300, 700, and 1250 nm particles at 5.24 mm downstream of the top electrode. Velocity differences between the 300 and 1250 nm particles can reach and exceed 0.5 m/s (>15%). Acceleration fields were also calculated by central differencing the convective derivative. Figure 4 shows the acceleration field of 700 nm particles at 177° phase angle. The magnitude of particle acceleration can exceed 10,000 m/s^{2}.
Uncertainty determination was conducted using the method suggested by Scharnowksi et_al [18] Velocity uncertainty was determined by deconvolving the particle image diameter from the cross-correlation peak, and was found to be 0.4 m/s in the x-direction on average. The uncertainty was attributed to plasma actuator variation and particles sticking together.
By applying a linear fit to the data, it is possible to extrapolate the velocity to the zero-sized particle. Smaller particles not only trace the flow better but also charge less than larger particles. A 0-nm particle has perfect tracing abilities and caries no charge; it represents the true air velocity. That particle does not exist, but the limit as the diameter goes to zero does exist and is shown in Fig. 5. The true air velocity induced by the plasma can be determined by extrapolation of data from multiple particle sizes.
PARTICLE CHARGING
The differences in velocities for the particles are caused by particle charging effects. The steady state particle charge is determined by equating the current to the particle from the contribution of positively and negatively charged species. Kennedy and Allen review orbital motion theory and the simpler orbital motion limited (OML) theory, which apply to low pressure plasmas or space plasmas [19]. As pressure increases, collisions impact charging dynamics. D'yachkov et_al [20] and Gatti and Kortshagen [21] provided analytic models of particle charge over a wide range of collisionality, including the collision enhanced ion charging at intermediate pressure and hydrodynamic regimes at higher pressures. Khrapak et_al derived two models for particle charging in a collisional plasma [22]. Their partially collisional model assumes that ion mobility is limited by collisions, but electron mobility is unaffected, so hydrodynamic equations are used for ions, while OML theory is applied to electrons. Their fully collisional model assumes that both ions and electrons are collision limited and hydrodynamic charging equations apply. They derive charge expressions for both theories but only the partially collisional theory has dependence on the particle size. Their hydrodynamic theory is accurate for the limit of vanishingly small particles.
Chang and Laframboise derived expressions for the electron, positive ion, and negative ion currents to a small particle that depend on collisionality [23]. They started by assuming that all species are limited by their mobility, and that drift diffusion dynamics apply. The particles are assumed to be small compared to the Debye length.
From these works, two particle charging theories are considered here. The first is the partially collisional (PC) charging theory modeled after the analysis by Khrapak et_al, which assumes a neutral plasma composed of positive ions and electrons. This theory has been validated for pressures up to 500 Pa in the PK-4 facility [24]. Equation (1) shows the positive ion current to the particle, while Eq. (2) shows the OML electron current to the particle
In the equations, q is the elementary charge, r is the radius, n is the density, ε is the ratio of ion to electron temperatures, and v_{t} is the thermal speed. The subscript symbols (+, e) correspond to the positive ions and electrons, respectively. The normalized particle potential is defined as φ=qV_{p}/K_{b}T_{e}, with V_{p} being the particle voltage, K_{b} the Boltzmann constant, and T_{e} the electron temperature.
The second theory is the fully collisional (FC) charging theory modeled after the work of Chang and Laframboise, which assumes a neutral plasma composed of positive ions, negative ions, and electrons. In this work, the collisionality parameter is defined as the ratio of mean free path to the particle radius, k=ℓ/r. Equations (3)–(5) show the current to the particle for the positive ions, electrons, and negative ions, respectively,
In the equations, D is the diffusion coefficient and the subscript symbol (−) represents negative ions, which are only considered in the fully collisional case.
The partially collisional equations easily reduce to a linear dependence for the radius. While at first glance, it appears as if there will be no radius dependence for the fully collisional case, k is the ratio of mean free path to radius, so both models depend on the particle size.
Einstein's relation, D=μ_{q}K_{b}T, where μ_{q} is the charged particle mobility, is used to relate diffusion to mobility and temperature for each species in the fully collisional theory. Both sets of ions were assumed to have a temperature of 400 K, while electrons were assumed to have a temperature of 11 600 K, which is an approximation based on simulation results [11,12]. The positive ion density was also approximated from the published simulations as 1.0 × 10^{18}/m^{3}. The density of electrons and negative ions is set, so that the plasma is quasineutral, n_{+}=n_{−} + n_{e}.
Table I lists the assumed plasma parameters and particle diameters. At one atmosphere, the assumed 1 MV/m electric field equates to 40 Townsend (Td). Interpolating data from Nielsen and Bradbury [25] and from Frommhold [26] from the LXCat database [27], the electron mobility was approximated as 0.064 m^{2}/V s. Ion mobility in air is still a topic of research with atmospheric plasma consisting of a plethora of species and results [28–30]. Humidity is important, as water molecules are attracted to ions and decrease their mobility [31]. Precise humidity control was not implemented in the experiment, but the relative humidity was estimated between 40% and 50%. In this work, positive and negative ion mobilities are approximated as 2.5 × 10^{−4} and 2.0 × 10^{−4} m^{2}/V s, respectively.
The cross-sectional area of N_{2} was used to calculate the mean free path of electrons [32]. The mean free path of ions was assumed to be the same as neutral molecules, 65 nm [33]. The crossover point between Stokes drag and Epstein drag is determined by the ratio of neutral mean free path and particle diameter, ℓ_{+}/2r. Stokes drag applies when the ratio is less than 0.44. For 300 nm particles, the ratio is 0.22, validating the use of Stokes drag for all the particles in the experiment.
The potential distribution around a particle in a collisional plasma was investigated by Khrapak et_al [34] They found that for collisional plasmas, the relation for the potential does not follow Debye-Hückel theory, and is better represented by an inverse distance relation. As such, the capacitance equation for a spherical capacitor is used to relate the particle voltage and charge as shown in Eq. (6)
where Q is the number of elementary charges on the particle and ε_{0} is the permittivity of free space.
Figure 6 plots the number of charges in units of elementary charges for a particle diameter range between 50 and 1400 nm. The percentages next to the fully collisional theory lines represent the percent of the negative charges that electrons populate. So, for the FC 100% line, the plasma is a quasineutral electron-ion plasma, while the 10% line represents a quasineutral plasma with electrons making up 1 out of 10 negative charges and negative ions making up the rest. The FC 0% line represents a fully ion-ion plasma and has a positive slope; the particles charge positively, albeit weakly. The partially collisional theory predicts more charge on a particle than the fully collisional theory, with a 1250 μm diameter particle gaining a 2000 electron charge. The difference is small, with 108 more electrons predicted for a 1250 nm diameter particle, corresponding to a 5.4% difference. Even at one atmosphere pressure, electrons are still not significantly mobility limited, and OML theory can be used with little error for particle diameters of less than a micron.
For an ion-ion plasma and for the assumed ion properties, the fully collisional theory predicts a positive particle charge. Usually, particles charge negatively due to the higher mobility of the electrons, however, particles can charge positively under certain conditions. Experiments in the night sky have detected positively charged particles [35]. A sounding rocket test was conducted in the northern sky between 80 and 90 km altitude. Positively charged particles were observed and believed to be larger than 2 nm and have a density of 3 g/cm^{3}. The region had a low electron density compared to positive ion density. Quasineutrality arguments led to a negative ion density that was 40 times higher than that of the electrons. Kim and Merlino conducted an experiment in low pressure plasma with K^{+} ions and SF_{6}^{−} ions [36]. It was shown that for high partial pressures of SF_{6}, the plasma potential drops due to the lack of electrons and the low mobility of SF_{6}^{−}. Under conditions where negative charges have a lower mobility than positive charges, particles can charge positively.
CHARGED PARTICLE AERODYNAMICS
Whether the charge is positive or negative, a strong electric field will impart a force on the particle and hinder the particle's ability to properly follow the flow. The most important force acting on a tracer particle is Stokes drag, shown in Eq. (7)
where u is the velocity of air and μ is the air viscosity. A particle in a flow will experience a strong Stokes drag until the velocity difference decreases. In PIV, a particle is chosen such that its characteristic response frequency, f_{p}=18μ/ρ_{p}d^{2}, is much larger than the characteristic oscillation frequency of the airflow. A strong electric field force can impede the ability of the particles to match the airflow speed. The particle density ρ_{p} is 1050 kg/m^{3}, similar to water. Equation (8) shows the sum of these two forces
where the mass has been written in terms of particle density and volume, and acceleration is best described as the derivative of velocity. The solution of this first order differential equation is shown in Eq. (9)
The particle reaches its final velocity more quickly if f_{p} is large, but unlike standard PIV, the electrostatic force will change the final velocity depending on the charge and electric field signs and magnitudes.
Figure 7 plots the step response of a 1250 nm particle with an f_{p} value of 0.2 MHz up to 1 m/s air flow velocity. The electric field is set to 1.0 MV/m, and 1000, 0, and −1000 elementary charges are applied to the particle. If the particle is not charged, it accelerates to the air speed as would be the case in flow that does not include plasma effects. When the particle charge is positive, the electric field helps the particle move faster than the air flow. When the charge is negative, the electric field reduces the particle's final speed. While the final speed of the particle is different, the characteristic response is the same; at 10 μs, all the particles have reached 87% of their final speed. For the chosen parameters, the charged particles have a velocity difference of 0.7 m/s when compared to the uncharged particle. One thousand charges may seem like a high number, but is in the range predicted by theory, and dusty plasma experiments in the PK4 facility show a charge on the order of 1000 elementary charges for micrometer sized particles [24].
Theoretically, a 0-nm diameter particle will follow the flow perfectly and be uncharged. The contribution of the electrostatic force on a particle's velocity depends on the ratio of Q/d. If the charge decreases more rapidly than the diameter, then the 0-nm particle has perfect tracing abilities and represents the true air speed induced by the plasma actuator. Otherwise, the 0-nm particle experiences electric field effects that need to be considered.
Figure 8 plots the partially collisional theory as well as a linear and a quadratic fit with zero intercepts. The quadratic fit better represents the curvature of the data, however, the exact power law dependence is not important. It is only important that the particle charge decreases more rapidly than linearly with respect to the diameter, which it does. Therefore, the charge reduces to zero when taking the limit to the 0-nm diameter, and the extrapolation is valid.
AERODYNAMIC FORCES
Having calculated the air velocity, it is possible to analyze the aerodynamic forces acting on a particle. Stokes drag is the prevalent force acting on PIV particles, while secondary effects include those from gravity, buoyancy, Reynolds number corrections, etc. The correction to Stokes Drag for finite Reynolds number is accomplished by multiplying Eq. (7) by φ, a correction factor, which depends on the Reynolds number, shown in Eq. (10)
The large velocity difference for the 300 nm particle is 0.2 m/s, and 1.0 m/s for the 1250 nm particle, which leads to the particle Reynolds number of 0.04 and 0.08, respectively. For the range between 0.01 and 20, φ is calculated using Eq. (11) (Ref [37])
which leads to correction factors of 0.7% and 1.4% for the 300 and 1250 nm particles, respectively. Correcting Stokes drag for finite Reynolds numbers over the particle does not account for the large difference in velocity compared to air. As such, Stokes drag is calculated without the correction factor.
Figure 9 shows the Stokes drag force acting on the 1250 nm particles when the actuator voltage is positive (a), and negative (b). It was assumed that the viscosity remains constant inside a weakly ionized and cold environment. Strong forces with magnitudes on the order of hundreds of pN exist near the electrode that extend vertically to the top of the field of view and 6 mm downstream. Other particles experience similar force fields but with different magnitudes; the 300 nm particles experience magnitudes slightly exceeding 10 pN. Further downstream, the force weakens, but in general, remains on the order of 1 pN.
Gravity and buoyancy depend on known material constants, for which ρ_{f} is taken to be 1.225 kg/m^{3}. The combination of gravity and buoyancy imparts a force of only 0.14 fN to the 300 nm particles, while the 1250 nm particles experience a 0.01 pN force acting on them. Therefore, gravity and buoyancy are also not taken into account.
Higher order forces [33], such as the history force, the added mass force, and the fluid stress force, depend on the acceleration of the particle or the fluid. For 1250 nm particles, large acceleration magnitudes are approximately 10 000 m/s^{2}. Coupled with the 1.1 × 10^{−15 }kg mass, the stronger particle inertial forces are around 10 pN and occur at the same region as the stronger Stokes drag force; however, Stokes drag exceeds magnitudes of 200 pN. Therefore, inertial and secondary forces that depend on particle acceleration are too small to cause such differences between the particle velocities. Having exhausted other plausible causes for the discrepancy between particle velocities, particle charging effects and the electrostatic forces are the remaining factors that can significantly affect a particle's velocity in plasma induced airflow.
ELECTROSTATIC FORCE
The electrostatic force is the only dusty plasma effect that needs to be considered. The particle density was low and the inter-particle distance was large. For two 1250 nm particles charged with 2000 electrons and separated by 32 pixels, or 300 μm, the Coulomb force is 10 fN. Even with a 2000 electron charge, a 1250 nm particle would charge to less than 5 V relative to the surrounding plasma, which is operated using 4.5 kV_{rms}.
Particle dynamics simplify the balance between the electrostatic force and the Stokes drag, as shown in Eqs. (12) and (13)
where the subscript p refers to the particle size. Particle acceleration has been calculated, and Stokes drag was determined in the “Aerodynamic Forces” section. The electrostatic force can be calculated for each particle size, and Fig. 10 shows the electrostatic force for the 1250 nm particles. The electrostatic force is similar to the Stokes drag force except that the direction is reversed. Given that the inertial term is small compared to the Stokes drag force, it is not surprising that the electrostatic force acts in direct opposition to Stokes drag. Rather, it is more accurate to say, that the Stokes drag force acts in the direction opposite to the electrostatic force, since the electrostatic force creates the velocity difference.
The electrostatic force is the strongest during the positive voltage part of the cycle when the plasma is more filamentary, which creates a positive-ion and an electron plasma. Particles gain more charge in plasma that does not have negative ions. The higher charge leads to a stronger force for a constant electric field. During the negative voltage part of the cycle, the plasma is diffuse, which creates negative oxygen ions. The electrostatic force is weaker during the negative voltage portion of the cycle. Simulation results predict similar electric fields between the positive and negative portions of the cycle [12]. The particle charge must be smaller in magnitude, as is predicted by the charging theories when negative ions are included.
Continuing with the 1 MV/m assumption, the 1250 nm particles experience between 100 and 200 pN force, which corresponds to a charge between 625 and 1250 elementary charges. From Fig. 6, the particle charge is estimated to be around 2000 elementary charges, or fewer, if negative ions are present. The assumptions that went into producing those results are reasonable but not absolute. The plasma structure, the electron temperature, and the electric field could be slightly different. Theoretical arguments can predict the charge of a particle in one atmosphere plasma to a factor of two and definitely within an order of magnitude.
The direction of the electrostatic force is very interesting. The force always pulls particles upstream towards the electrode. Stokes drag counteracts the electrostatic force by always pushing the particles downstream, but, it is interesting to note that directions do not change with phase.
At 91° phase angle, the voltage applied to the top electrode is positive, and it is assumed that the electric field points downstream towards the grounded bottom electrode. The particles are being pulled upstream by the electric field, which implies that they have a negative charge. At 264°, the voltage applied to the top electrode is negative, and the electric field points upstream from the grounded bottom electrode towards the top electrode. In this case too, the particles are being pulled upstream, which implies that the particles have a positive charge, though the magnitude is smaller than when the particles are charged negatively.
Theoretical arguments presented above predict a positive charge when negative ions are limited in their mobility, which has been supported by experiments. The results presented here show that plasma actuators impart a positive charge on particles during certain phases of the voltage cycle.
Separating out the charge and the electric field component of the electrostatic force can extend the analysis of plasma actuators and provide crucial information about their operation. Unfortunately, separating the charge and the electric field from the force is not possible with the current set of equations. There are three unknowns: the charge of the particle, the electric field in the x-direction, and the electric field in the y-direction. One particle set provides two equations: sum of the forces in the x- and y-directions. This is not enough to solve the system of equations, but, using two particle sets, the number of equations increases to four, two for each particle, and the number of unknowns also increases to four. Therefore, the system can, in principle, be solved. However, the last equation can be derived from the previous three, and is therefore dependent.
Taking the inertial component to be small, it is possible to equate Stokes drag and the electrostatic force in Eqs. (12) and (13). Dividing the two equations leads to the ratio of forces and the ratio of electric fields as a function of air velocity and particle velocities, as shown in Eq. (14)
This relation holds true for every particle. It was assumed that the particles do not significantly alter the plasma because the plasma actuator operated at 4.5 kV_{rms}, while, from theory, the particles charge to less than 5 V. Hence, the electric field created by the plasma actuator is assumed to be constant between different particle sizes. This assumption leads to Eq. (15)
which relates the velocities between two particle sets. The specific particle sets can be any of the differently sized particles. Both velocity components for both particle sizes are equated to each other. Knowing three velocity components allows for calculating the fourth, which proves the dependency of the fourth equation. Including more particles will add one equation and one unknown without closing the system of equations.
Maxwell's equations can be used to close the system, but they are differential equations that require boundary conditions and information about charge density. Electric field measurements for the dielectric boundary have been conducted by Enloe et_al [38] and reproduced by Nichols and Rovey [39]. However, the data pertain to only one side, and at least one more boundary condition is needed.
Simulations are the best method for estimating plasma parameters such us density and temperature. The results from this work can be used to validate the simulation results. Theoretical arguments agree with experimental results to within a factor of two and the equations can be easily programmed into the simulation.
CONCLUSION
Dusty plasma effects have been investigated for PIV measurements of plasma actuator flow. The results of PIV experiments using multiple monodisperse particles have been summarized. Smaller particles were found to better track the true air velocity than larger particles, and the difference is attributed to the electrostatic force arising from particle charging effects. Two particle charging theories are considered: the partially collisional theory, which assumes that the ions are limited in their mobility, while the electrons are not, and the fully collisional theory, which assumes that positive ions, negative ions, and electrons are mobility limited. Reasonable assumptions were made in regard to the plasma parameters, and it was shown that for a positive ion and an electron plasma, the two theories give similar results.
Particle charge is shown to decrease more rapidly than linearly with respect to particle diameter. The electrostatic force acting on the particles diminishes more rapidly than Stokes drag in the limit as the particle diameter approaches zero. The true air velocity field was extracted by extrapolating to the 0-nm particle size.
Stokes drag was calculated based on the velocity difference between the particles and the air. Other PIV forces, like gravity, buoyancy, and acceleration related forces were shown to be weak in comparison to Stokes drag. Furthermore, dusty plasma effects such as particle interactions, voltage potential interactions, and the ion drag force were also shown to be weak.
The electrostatic force was the only force that could affect a particle's tracing ability. The results showed that the 300 nm particles experienced forces on the order of 20 pN, while the 1250 nm particles experienced forces on the order of 200 pN. The positive portion of the voltage cycle showed stronger electrostatic forces than the negative portion of the cycle. This effect is attributed to different discharges: filamentary for the positive voltage and diffuse for the negative voltage.
From corona discharges, it is known that positive voltages are associated with arc-like discharges that produce a positive-ion and an electron plasma, while negative voltages are associated with more stable discharges that produce plasma containing positive ions, negative ions, and electrons. Negative ions hinder particle charging, and therefore reduce the electrostatic force acting on the particle.
Interestingly, the electrostatic force always acted to slow the particles, even though the electric field changed directions. This implies that the particles charged negatively when the actuator voltage was positive and positively when the actuator voltage was negative. Positively charged dust particles are rare, occurring only in plasmas that have low electron densities and slow negative ions.
Separating the charge and the electric field from the electrostatic force was found to be impossible with the current data. However, theoretical arguments were able to predict the particle charge to within a factor of two. The force results can be used for validations in simulations. The charging equations can be used with the density, temperature, and electric field results to calculate the force on a virtual particle. Based on the results of this work, a plasma actuator with a simple geometry and a sinusoidal waveform should impart approximately 100 pN of force on a 1 μm diameter particle.
TABLE I. 
Plasma parameters.
TABLE I. -body
2r (nm)	300, 500, 700, 900, 1250
E	1.0 MV/m	n_{+}	1.0 × 10^{18} m^{−3}
T_{e}	11 600 K	T_{+}	400 K
λ_{De}	7.4 μm	λ_{D+}	1.2 μm
ℓ_{e}	400 nm	ℓ_{+}	65 nm
μ_{e}	0.064 m^{2}/V s	μ_{+}	2.5 × 10^{−4} m^{2}/V s
μ_{−}	2.0 × 10^{−4} m^{2}/V s	ℓ_{+}/2r	0.05–0.22
FIG. 1. 
Plasma actuator schematic representative of the experimental setup.
FIG. 2. 
Velocity flow field for 700 nm particles at 264° phase angle.
FIG. 3. 
X-direction particle speed at the point 5.24 mm and 0.42 mm downstream.
FIG. 4. 
700 nm particle acceleration field at 177° phase angle.
FIG. 5. 
Linear fit extrapolation of particle size data with 95% uncertainty bounds.
FIG. 6. 
Particle charge for partially collisional and fully collisional theory with percentage of electrons to positive ions.
FIG. 7. 
Step response of a 1250 nm particle with +1000, 0, and −1000 elementary charges.
FIG. 8. 
Linear and quadratic fits for the partially collisional charging theory.
FIG. 9. 
Stokes drag force for the 1250 nm particles at (a) 91° and (b) 264° phase angles.
FIG. 10. 
Electrostatic force acting on the 1250 nm particles at (a) 91° and (b) 264° phase angles.
