Characterization of an electrothermal plasma source for fusion transient simulations
The realization of fusion energy requires materials that can withstand high heat and particle fluxes at the plasma material interface. In this work, an electrothermal (ET) plasma source has been designed as a transient heat flux source for a linear plasma material interaction device. An ET plasma source operates in the ablative arc regime driven by a DC capacitive discharge. The current channel width is defined by the 4 mm bore of a boron nitride liner. At large plasma currents, the arc impacts the liner wall, leading to high particle and heat fluxes to the liner material, which subsequently ablates and ionizes. This results in a high density plasma with a large unidirectional bulk flow out of the source exit. The pulse length for the ET source has been optimized using a pulse forming network to have durations of 1 and 2 ms. The peak currents and maximum source energies seen in this system are 1.9 kA and 1.2 kJ for the 2 ms pulse and 3.2 kA and 2.1 kJ for the 1 ms pulse, respectively. This work is a proof of the principal project to show that an ET source produces electron densities and heat fluxes comparable to those anticipated in transient events in large future magnetic confinement fusion devices. Heat flux, plasma temperature, and plasma density were determined for each shot using infrared imaging and optical spectroscopy techniques. This paper will discuss the assumptions, methods, and results of the experiments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Future tokamak fusion devices are faced with many engineering challenges. These challenges must be overcome before a reactor with a net positive gain in energy can be engineered. One of the main challenges that surrounds the design and large scale implementation of these devices for energy production is ensuring the survivability of the materials that make up the inner wall panels. Of these inner wall panels, the divertor tiles are of primary concern because during transient events, the majority of the power flux is directed to the divertor region. In addition to high steady-state heat fluxes on the order of 10 MW/m^{2}, transient heat and particle fluxes caused by magnetohydrodynamic instabilities, or Edge Localized Modes (ELMs), at the edge of the plasma can lead to transient heat fluxes of several GW/m^{2}. The instabilities have to be controlled such that their maximum heat fluxes are acceptable for the plasma facing materials. Designing materials which can sustain higher transient heat loads would allow for larger operational flexibility for the tokamak. If a material reaches its erosion lifetime too quickly (through ablation, melting, and cracking), it may cause an unscheduled shutdown of tokamak operation. When a material erodes too much, it can penetrate into the core of the tokamak plasma, introduce mechanisms of energy loss, and debilitate the fusion process. As tokamak plasmas increase in size, the energy released by ELMs will also increase. Hence, testing materials under typical heat fluxes for large future fusion reactors is not an option for current fusion devices since the ELM energies are too small and do not deposit enough energy on the divertor tiles. Linear plasma devices such as Magnum-PSI [1] and the planned Material Plasma Exposure eXperiment (MPEX) [2] are designed to produce a tokamak-divertor like steady-state plasma to test samples of the candidate material for plasma facing components. Machines such as these have the advantage to be dedicated to plasma-material interaction studies with better diagnostic access and are much more affordable to operate when compared to large tokamaks. In order for these linear devices to produce conditions similar to a real tokamak environment, they will need transient ELM simulation capabilities. Magnum-PSI is using a cascaded arc system for this purpose [1]. In this work, an electrothermal (ET) plasma source is designed and tested for use as a proof of the principal ELM simulator.
In the past, ET plasma sources have been used in a vast number of research areas. Ignition sources for electrothermal chemical weapons [3–5], satellite thrusters [6], and pellet injection launchers for fusion applications [7,8] are among the top areas of recent interest. These types of plasma sources operate in an ablative arc regime driven by a DC capacitive discharge. The arc is initiated across a three electrode spark gap using a 30 kV trigger. This paper will outline the electrical system design along with the methods and diagnostics used to determine plasma parameters (temperature and density) and resulting heat flux. An explanation of electrothermal plasma source components, operation, and supporting physics can be found in the works of Gebhart, Esmond, and Winfrey [9–11].
II. PULSE SHAPING
The discharge circuit for an ET source normally consists of a high voltage capacitor and a spark gap switch. This delivers the power directly to the ET source with a pulse length of ∼100 μs. ELMs typically deliver energy to the divertor over a duration of ∼1 ms. To more closely mimic ELMs, a pulse forming network (PFN) consisting of an inductor and a resistor is connected in series with the capacitor, spark gap, and plasma source. The inductor serves to increase the pulse length, and the resistor reduces ringing to the capacitor. The capacitor used in this work is a 10 kV, 335 μF capacitor that has a 10% reversal rating. The RLC circuit is configured for two different pulse lengths, 1 and 2 ms. The PFN is designed to create a slightly underdamped pulse. An RLC discharge can be described using the following equation:
where S_{1} and S_{2} are the roots of the solution of Kirchhoff's voltage law: S_{1}=−α+α^{2}−ω02 and S_{2}=−α−α^{2}−ω02. α is the damping factor, R2L, and ω_{o} is the undamped natural frequency of the discharge, 1LC. A MATLAB code was written and utilized to determine the optimal combination of R and L to produce the desired full width at half maximum (FWHM) pulse. It was found that a 0.5 mH inductor and a 2 Ω resistor would produce a slightly underdamped pulse with a 2 ms total pulse length.
For the 2 ms pulse, the resistor used is a 2 Ω ARCOL low inductance, chassis mounted, 300 W resistor. The inductor was designed and built in-house. It has 67 windings of 12-gauge solid copper wire around an 8 in. long, 6 in. diameter polyvinyl chloride (PVC) segment. Calculations with these parameters predicted a 0.5 mH inductance. Upon completion, an inductance bridge was used to measure the actual inductance, which was found to be 0.427 mH. This value fell within tolerance and did not drop the damping coefficient below the lowest allowable limit. This limit was defined by the damping factor and subsequent reversal voltage. The lowest limit translates to a maximum reversal voltage of 500 V. The components for the 1 ms pulse consist of a 1 Ω, 2500 W resistor and a 0.1 mH inductor. The inductor was designed to have a value of 0.13 mH to account for the deficiency seen while constructing the inductor for the 2 ms pulse. The measured inductance for this inductor was 0.1 mH. The 1 ms PFN was designed in order to provide a larger current density to the source. As the inductance needed for a PFN increases, the resistance needed to provide the correct damping also increases, which decreases current for a given constant capacitor voltage. The complete electrical system schematic is shown in Fig. 1 and includes safety relays and controllers.
III. DIAGNOSTICS AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
There are four main diagnostic components used in this work: an Ocean Optics LIBS 2500+ spectrometer, a FLIR SC4000 infrared camera, two Tektronix P6015A high voltage probes, and a Pearson Model 5664 current monitor. The spectrometer, IR camera, oscilloscope, and capacitor trigger module are simultaneously triggered. The spectrometer has seven channels that span the 200 nm–980 nm range. The LIBS 2500+ system comes with a custom fiber that bundles all seven, 600 micron, fibers into one SubMiniature version A (SMA) connection for easy integration. The LIBS 2500+ system has an optical resolution of ∼0.1 nm. The spectrometer is controlled using an Ocean Optics software package called OceanView. Using this control and analysis software, the spectrometer is set to trigger and integrate over 20 ms. The fiber bundle looks into the vacuum chamber through a quartz viewport and views the plasma from the top at an angle of ∼60°.
The infrared camera looks through a zinc selenide window at a tungsten target plate. The camera and the direction of plasma flow are perpendicular to each other, and so, the tungsten plate is installed at an angle of 45°. Figure 2 shows a diagram of the orientation and positioning of the camera, ET source, and target plate. The camera is controlled using a program called ResearchIR. The camera has a 475.5 Hz frame rate at a 256 × 256 pixel image size and is set to save 20 frames once the pulse is triggered. The integration time for each frame depends on the selected temperature range, and the frame rate is dependent on the image size. Multiple temperature ranges were used to view various phenomena. With a lower temperature setting (150–400 °C for the 1 ms pulse), flow of the plasma and its overall heating impact may be seen. Significant camera saturation occurs when using the lower temperature range, and so, no calculations were done using these data. With a higher temperature range setting (700–1500 °C for the 1 ms pulse), only a small area of the impact may be seen, but no saturation occurs. A higher temperature range, with no saturation, was used to calculate the maximum heat fluxes produced using the two pulse lengths. The temperature ranges used for each pulse length varied because of the difference in the amount of heat delivered. For the 2 ms pulse length, the flow can be seen with a temperature range of 80–200 °C, compared to 150–400 °C used for the 1 ms pulse length.
The voltage probes are used to monitor the voltage stored on the capacitor and to measure the discharge potential across the source. Using the voltage at the source and the current measured by the current monitor, power delivered over the duration of the pulse can be calculated. Figure 3 shows a plot of power curves for four separate shots, two with a 1 ms pulse length and two with a 2 ms pulse length.
The source bolts to a custom 6 in. ConFlat (CF) flange that is attached to the vacuum chamber. The chamber is a five-way cross. All these have 6 in. CF connections. One is used for the source. The second is used to connect lines for a dry scroll pump and a turbo pump along with pressure gauges. The third has three 2¾ in. CF flanges attached to it. One of which is a gas fill line, and the other two are blank for any additional diagnostics or feed-throughs. The fourth 6 in. CF flange is the horizontal viewport in which the zinc selenide window is attached. The fifth flange is vertical and contains a quick access door with a quartz viewport. During operation, the chamber is pumped down to the vacuum level of ∼10^{−4 }Torr and then back filled with helium gas to roughly 10 Torr. This pressure is the optimal pressure for breakdown through an ET source for the voltage applied in this work. Once an acceptable helium pressure is reached, the capacitor is discharged and diagnostics are triggered.
IV. DENSITY AND TEMPERATURE CALCULATIONS
Temperature and density were calculated using the analysis of the optical spectra collected during each pulse. Data were collected using the OceanView software, and then, the seven channels were combined to form one continuous data file using a MATLAB script. The data were imported into the SpecLine software, where peaks were analyzed and compared against the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) database to determine the correct composition of each line. The plasma mostly consists of hydrogen, helium, boron, nitrogen, and copper. Hydrogen is present because of water vapor that is inherently in the system as baking the chamber is not currently possible. The H_{α} and H_{β} Balmer series lines have a very high relative intensity and are the most intense in the resulting spectra. Helium, boron, and nitrogen are intentionally present in the system through the fill gas and the boron nitride liner. The copper ground housing sputters when the arc current flows to it, causing copper to enter the plasma jet. Copper lines are present in every shot independent of current amplitudes. Typical spectra from an ET configuration such as this can be seen in Fig. 4. The figure shows a typical spectrum collected (for Shot #28), and it includes labels for all the main spectral lines of interest.
ET plasmas are assumed to be at local thermodynamic equilibrium [12], meaning that they are also Maxwellian. Because of this, the relative line method can be used to calculate plasma temperatures. The relative line method used for these calculations is shown in the following equation:
In Eq. (2), the variables denoted with a prime are values from the transition with the higher energy. In this equation, the variable E signifies the transition energy. I is the intensity, λ is the wavelength, g is the statistical weight of the lower state of the transition, and f is the oscillator strength. These variables were taken from the NIST atomic spectra database. In the spectra, there are three prominent helium peaks: 587.6 nm, 667.8 nm, and 706.5 nm. It has been reported in work by Pospieszczyk et_al [13] that line ratios using the 587.6 nm peak should not be used in relative line methods because of an obvious density dependence. If used, it will introduce a large amount of error in temperature calculations. It was reported that any line ratios including the 706.5 nm line are useful because of a lack of density dependence. Although the 667.8 nm line normally exhibits tendencies of self-absorption, they can be ignored because of the geometry and viewing thickness of the plasma. The spectrometer only views a ∼7 mm thick section of plasma, which limits the probability of self-absorption, influencing line peak values. Temperatures are calculated using the 667.8 nm and 706.5 nm peaks and the corresponding values from the NIST database. Figure 5 shows a plot of electron temperatures measured for various electrical input energies using both PFN designs (1 and 2 ms pulses). Temperatures were also calculated using B-I line ratios (two boron lines shown in Fig. 4). The temperatures calculated using the He-I lines and B-I lines agree within 10%. Only the temperatures calculated using He-I lines are reported in this work.
The input energies are constrained to a limited range. The lower end of the energy range is determined by the breakdown potential necessary for the respective source length. The range is limited on the higher end by the resistor in the PFN. Compared to the range of input electrical energies, the plasma temperatures for each pulse length is essentially constant, with an average of about 1.2 eV for the 2 ms pulse and 5 eV for the 1 ms pulse. In the past, it has been shown that plasma produced with an ET source increases in temperature with increased current until a point is reached in the ablative process where too many cold particles are introduced into the plasma for ohmic heating to have an increased effect. This phenomenon is known as vapor shielding [14]. As input energies greatly increase, resulting plasma temperatures are only increased by a small margin because of this vapor shielding mechanism. The maximum current for the shots shown in Fig. 5 was approximately 1800 A, and the minimum was 1400 A for the 2 ms pulse. The range for the 1 ms pulse was between 2800 A and 3200 A.
Electron densities were calculated using Stark broadening of the H_{β} (486.1 nm) line. To use Stark broadening, other possible line broadening mechanisms must either be proven as non-influential or accounted for in the calculations. Mechanisms such as Doppler, instrument, Van Der Waals, and resonance broadening were accounted for when determining the usefulness of density calculations simply based on stark effects. Instrument broadening was accounted for by using a low-density neon lamp and calculating a function for the instrument broadening. This function is used to determine the magnitude of broadening and serves as a correction factor to account for the effects of instrument broadening in the H_{β} Lorentzian line profile. Doppler broadening is assumed to be non-influential because of the inherent high density, low thermal effects (low temperature), and collisional nature of an ET plasma. The plasma has a high velocity (500 m/s) unidirectional flow due to the large pressure generated within the capillary. This unidirectional flow causes a Doppler shift in the blue direction because of the orientation of the spectrometer relative to the bulk motion of the plasma. This is apparent in the line shape presented in Fig. 6. Contributions from Van der Waals and resonance mechanisms assumed to be negligible, as ion dynamics have almost no effect on line emissions in plasmas with densities greater than 3.0 × 10^{20} electrons/m^{3}.
To further prove that this can be assumed to be Stark broadened, data for the line used fit with a Gaussian and a Lorentzian profile and the R-squared values were calculated. R-squared values are a statistical measure of how closely data are represented by a regression fit. An R-squared value of 1 indicates a perfect fit. Lines influenced by a Stark broadened plasma will be mostly Lorentzian in distribution. The average R-squared values for the Lorentzian fit for all shots in question were 0.9897 and 0.8736 for the Gaussian fit. The Lorentzian and Gaussian fits for the H_{β} line seen in Shot 0017 are shown in Fig. 6. The fits are plotted against the raw data which have not corrected for instrument broadening. The Doppler shift is very apparent in the non-symmetry of the wings and the slight shift in the line center. These raw data were also fit with a pseudo-Voigt function, and the R-squared value was, on average, 0.9034. The peak was the cause of most of the error using the pseudo-Voigt fit.
Densities were calculated using a simple relationship between the theoretical half width, measured half width, and electron density. Theoretical half widths are calculated using the Stark profile, S(α), of the line in question. The theoretical half width is the value, α, in which the Stark profile is at half its maximum value. The values of α are tabulated for more common Stark broadened lines [15]. The relationship used to calculate electron density is shown in the following equation:
In Eq. (3), α_{½} is the theoretical half width, Δλ_{½} is the measured half width, and n_{e} is the electron density. Figure 7 shows a plot of the electron densities compared to the input electrical energies for both pulse lengths. As previously stated, the pulse length (determined by the PFN) dictates the amount of energy delivered by the pulse to the source because the energy on the capacitor remains constant at 5 kJ. The PFN for the longer pulse (2 ms) length dissipates much more power than the PFN for the 1 ms pulse. The limited range of input energies results in a limited change in temperature and density. Temperatures for the 2 ms pulse range from 0.5 to 1.5 eV, and densities range from 1.4 × 10^{21} to 2.2 × 10^{21} electrons/m^{3}. Temperatures and densities for the 1 ms pulse range from 4.5 to 5.3 eV and 1.9 × 10^{22} to 3.0 ×10^{22} electrons/m^{3}, respectively. To ensure consistency, densities were calculated using the H_{α} and the 667.8 nm He-I lines and compared to densities calculated using the H_{β} line. On average, density calculations using the H_{α} line produced a value of 1.97 × 10^{22} electrons/m^{3} for the 1 ms pulse and 1.53 × 10^{21} electrons/m^{3} for the 2 ms pulse. Calculations using H_{α} produced densities ∼20% less than H_{β}. Calculations using the 667.8 nm He-I line produced results that were, on average, 5% greater than the results given with the H_{β} line. The results for the 1 ms pulse, on average, were 2.44 × 10^{22} electrons/m^{3} for the 1 ms pulse and 1.89 × 10^{21} electrons/m^{3} for the 2 ms pulse. The data shown in Fig. 7 are data calculated using the H_{β} line.
V. HEAT FLUX CALCULATIONS
Heat flux is a very important parameter for this study. Cracking and pitting are the main mechanisms of material damage seen on plasma facing components in large scale fusion devices because of the high energy particles and large magnitude of incident heat fluxes. Before collecting infrared data, the target emissivity is determined using a heat gun and a thermocouple. The heat gun is used to heat the plate to a temperature of 100 °C. Then, the emissivity parameter in the ResearchIR software is adjusted so that the temperature measured by the camera matches the temperature on the thermocouple. The emissivity determined by this method ranged from 0.09 to 0.13.
The IR camera and other diagnostics are triggered at the same time as the pulse trigger to synchronize all time signals. The camera control/data collection software, ResearchIR, collects and saves 20 frames of data at 475.5 Hz. The frame by frame data is then exported to an Excel file. This Excel file is read by a MATLAB program where it is displayed in a contour plot, and the heat flux is calculated. Infrared data were collected by the camera using various temperature ranges in order to visualize different aspects of the plasma impact such as maximum temperature deposited or incident plasma flow patterns. As previously stated, the target plate is angled at 45° with respect to the plasma jet to account for the perpendicular orientation of the IR camera with respect to the ET source. Figure 8 shows a frame by frame (frames 1–3) progression of the 1 ms discharge on the target plate (for Shot 69) in a temperature range of 700–1500 °C. This shot produced a heat flux of 2.02 GW/m^{2} with temperatures peaking at 1400 °C. This shot's peak temperatures impacted an area measured to be 0.234 cm^{2}. The pressure generated in the source is very large (∼104 MPa) which causes flow for a few milliseconds after the discharge has ceased, and so, heat is deposited for milliseconds after the original pulse has ended. Figure 9 shows a progression of (shot 64) that was used to visualize the flow of plasma and hot gas after hitting the plate. This video was captured using a temperature range of 150–400 °C. The pale pink spot in the center of the frame is the location of the plasma impact. This color indicates saturation of the camera sensor.
The field of view is 1.4 in. × 1.4 in. broken into a 256 × 256 pixel image. The calculated pixel size is used to determine the volume and area of the impacted target plate. The affected area was slightly different for each shot (0.278 cm^{2} on average). The amount of heat deposited onto the plate was calculated using a lumped capacitance method, shown in the following equation:
Here, Q is energy in the form of heat, m is the mass of the target plate affected, C_{p} is the specific heat capacity of the tungsten plate, and ΔT is the change in the temperature of the plate. The mass of the plate is calculated using the density and the volume of the affected area. The depth into the material is determined using a 1-D time dependent finite difference model. This model uses the time stamp of the frame in question to calculate how far into the material the heat penetrates. The affected area was determined visually for each shot and input into the heat flux calculation. Using this area and the heat penetration thickness, a total volume of material is calculated. ΔT is calculated by subtracting room temperature from the temperature output by the infrared measurements. There is ample time between shots to ensure that the target material reaches room temperature. The angle orientation of the target with respect to the camera was taken into account in the calculations using the geometrical relationship. The code outputs a contour plot of the frame in question along with the calculated value of heat flux. Figure 10 displays the contour plot of the frame used to calculate heat flux (from Shot 105). The background color of the plot represents a false temperature measurement because of the temperature range of the camera. In this shot, the camera range was 150–400 °C, and so, the background temperature displays as 150 °C. A specific area that includes the hottest part of the plate was used to calculate heat flux. This area is shown approximately by the black box in the figure. This area is approximately 0.312 cm^{2}. Figure 11 shows a plot of heat flux versus total input energy for both pulse lengths (1 ms and 2 ms). The maximum heat flux was found to be around 2 GW/m^{2}. The 1 ms pulse length produced the higher heat flux because of the increased energy delivered to the source.
To determine the amount of delivered to the target from the ionized particles directly, heat deposition calculations were carried out using a sheath analysis. The average temperatures and densities were used for both pulse lengths to obtain an average heat flux. The 1 ms pulse produced a plasma with an average temperature and density of 5 eV and 2.5 × 10^{22} electrons/m^{3}, respectively. These plasma characteristics lead to a heat flux of 1.2 GW/m^{2}. Similarly, the 2 ms pulse produces, on average, a plasma with a temperature of 1.2 eV and a density of 1.8 × 10^{21} electrons/m^{3}, which corresponds to a heat flux of 250 MW/m^{2}. The discrepancies between the heat fluxes calculated using the IR imaging and the sheath approximation are believed to result from low ionization fractions. The ionization fractions for the two pulse lengths are calculated to be 0.60 (1 ms pulse) and 0.15 (2 ms pulse) using Saha's equation. Hot un-ionized gas also strikes the plate as the pulse occurs. The sheath model does not include a term for energetic neutral atoms. The proportion of heat delivered to the plate is not linearly related to the ionization fraction.
VI. SUMMARY
ELMs in future large tokamaks are predicted to deliver heat fluxes upwards of 1 GW/m^{2} to the divertor plasma facing components. Future linear plasma devices for plasma material interaction studies must have the capability to produce these types of transients to properly mimic a tokamak divertor plasma environment. Within the operating space (input energy, source dimensions, pulse lengths, and fill gasses) explored in this work, the ET source produced a plasma which meets the needs of these future linear devices. With a 1 ms pulse length, the plasma produced in the arc had an average temperature and density of ∼5 eV and 2.5 × 10^{22} electrons/m^{3}, respectively. The ion flux to the target was found to be upwards 1.3 × 10^{26} ions/m^{2}, which translates to a 1.2 GW/m^{2} heat flux when using a sheath approximation to perform the calculations. The average measured heat flux found using IR imaging was approximately 2.1 GW/m^{2}. Similarly, the average temperature and density for the 2 ms pulse were found to be 1.2 eV and 1.8 × 10^{21} electrons/m^{3}, respectively, significantly less than those for the 1 ms pulse. The ion flux and calculated heat flux were found to be 1.15 × 10^{25} ions/m^{2} and 250 MW/m^{2}, respectively. The difference in input energy between the two pulse lengths is large and correlates well with the difference in delivered heat flux.
FIG. 1. 
Basic schematic of the electrical system used for ET source operation.
FIG. 2. 
Diagram showing the orientation and relative positioning of the ET source, target plate, and IR camera.
FIG. 3. 
Plot showing power curves for four pulses, two of which show 1 ms pulse and the other two show a 2 ms pulse.
FIG. 4. 
Image showing the spectrum taken during Shot 28. The main lines and peaks of interest are labeled.
FIG. 5. 
Plot of input energy (electrical) versus calculated plasma temperature for two different ET pulse lengths.
FIG. 6. 
A plot of the H-β line for Shot 0017, blue is the raw data, red is the Lorentzian fit, and yellow is the Gaussian fit. It shows that the Lorentzian fit has a stronger relationship with the raw data.
FIG. 7. 
Plot of input energy (electrical) versus calculated plasma densities for two pulse lengths.
FIG. 8. 
Images showing a frame by frame progression of the temperatures produced as the 1 ms discharge from Shot 69 impacts the target plate. The temperature range used for this video was 700–1500 °C.
FIG. 9. 
Frame by frame images of the 1 ms discharge from Shot 64. It shows the turbulence of the plasma plume as it strikes the target plate. The temperature range used for this video was 150–400 °C.
FIG. 10. 
A contour plot of Shot 105 used to calculate heat flux from a 2 ms pulse. The color label on the right has units of Celsius.
FIG. 11. 
A plot of heat flux versus total input (electrical) energy for two pulse lengths.
