Enhanced energy extraction in an open loop single-axis solar tracking PV system with optimized tracker rotation about tilted axis
We compare the energy extracted from single-axis solar tracking systems employing optimized rotation about the tilted axis and the azimuth axis, respectively. It is shown that the optimized rotation about the tilted axis has the potential to extract significantly higher energy, particularly at lower latitudes. An open loop single-axis solar tracking system that tracks the sun through optimized rotation about the tilted axis is proposed and demonstrated. The system takes the location parameters, axis tilt, and the initial time and date as inputs and calculates the solar position at any given time. The solar position in turn decides the optimized rotation. In a prototype using a single potentiometer based angle determination method, the error between the computed and implemented rotation angles remains within ±3°. The tracking system with optimized rotation about the tilted axis extracted 20.01% more energy than a fixed panel system as opposed to 11.72% for that of the azimuth tracking system at the same tilt angle under identical conditions on a clear day at a latitude of 23.81°N. These percentage enhancements are in agreement with theoretical predictions. On a partially cloudy day, the advantages of the optimized rotational tracking about the tilted axis are diminished as the optimized rotational tracking system extracted 8.59% more energy than the fixed panel, whereas the azimuth tracking system extracted 7.86% more energy with respect to the fixed panel system at the same tilt angle at the same latitude.
I. INTRODUCTION
Solar tracking is a measure which can be adopted to improve electrical energy extraction from photovoltaic (PV) systems. Several methods and techniques can be used to track the Sun's position. In 1975, one of the first solar trackers was designed by Mcfee [1]. Semma and Imamura used a microprocessor to direct the solar collector position towards the sun [2]. Different analyses on tracking systems based on different approaches, such as sensor-based [3], single-axis-three position [4], and MPPT controller based systems [5] have shown that tracking panel systems extract more energy with respect to fixed panel systems.
Different researchers have estimated different amounts of enhancement of extracted energy by using tracker systems. The percent enhancement depends on the type of tracker used, the geographical location considered, and the time of the year considered. Pavlovic et_al in a study on energy generated by different PV system power plants in Sokobanja, Serbia, reported that a single-axis system could generate 20.42% more energy and a dual-axis system could generate 22.06% more energy with respect to the fixed panel system [6]. Wang and Lu experimentally demonstrated that the dual-axis solar tracking PV system developed by them enhanced the gain in energy up to 28.31% compared to a fixed system for a partly cloudy day in New Taipei City, Taiwan [7]. The open loop dual-axis solar tracking system of Sidek et_al could produce 26.9% and 12.8% more energy than a fixed-tilted PV system under clear and heavy overcast conditions, respectively [8]. Fathabadi proposed a dual-axis solar tracker with a very minute tracking error (0.43°) and experimentally showed that the tracking system is capable of capturing 19.1%–30.2% more energy compared to a fixed system [9]. Lazaroiu et_al investigated the increase in the daily produced energy by the tracker PV system with single-axis East-West rotation with respect to a fixed panel system over a 30 day period and reported an increase in 12%–20% by using the sun tracker under different weather conditions [10]. Narvarte and Lorenzo reported that for reasonable ground cover ratios, the energy enhancement for horizontal single-axis tracking with respect to fixed surfaces ranges from 18% to 25%, and from 37% to 45% for the dual-axis tracking by simulating the annual energy yield in Almeria, Spain [11]. Al Tarabsheh et_al demonstrated energy gain for the single-axis system in Jordan for two disparate schemes: one by fixing the azimuth angle while tracking with optimized inclination angles and the other by fixing the inclination angle while tracking with optimized azimuth angles; they showed an energy gain of 5.87% and 20.12%, respectively, with that of the fixed tilt system based on the simulation results [12]. They also obtained an energy gain of 30.82% for a dual-axis tracking system.
Based on the tracking algorithm, solar tracking systems can be broadly classified as open loop and closed loop systems. The open loop tracking system is the system that computes the sun position based on solar positioning equations or lookup table. This system is immune to disturbances like shading or reflection for not requiring any feedback from the sun. Al-Naima and Yaghobian proposed the dual-axis solar tracking system based on astronomical coordinates of the sun and demonstrated that the system performed better than conventional sensor-controlled systems [13]. Wahane and Gade designed a system that computed the solar position for a given location and time and rotated the panel accordingly [14]. Mi et_al proposed an open loop solar tracking scheme employing variable tracking frequency controlled in accordance with solar velocity in order to minimize external energy for tracking by reducing tracking frequency [15]. Lin et_al developed a dual-axis open loop solar tracker for mobile photovoltaic applications using the global positioning system along with an Arduino microprocessor [16].
Most of the research studies in the field of open loop tracking involve dual-axis systems. There are few studies on single-axis open loop solar tracking. Sungur has designed a PLC based open loop single-axis tracking system that tracks the sun according to the azimuth angle [17]. Also, Lorenzo et_al conducted a study on a PV system based on azimuth tracking [18]. Lee et_al developed a scheme for single-axis solar tracking, in which first the solar panel is rotated within defined rotation range and then the rotation of the tracker is implemented at an optimal angle where maximum power is detected [19].
Very few studies have also been reported on single-axis solar tracking with optimized rotation about the tilted axis. In this paper, we propose a single-axis open loop tracking scheme employing optimized tracker rotation about the tilted axis and evaluate the performance of the proposed scheme both theoretically and experimentally with respect to the azimuth tracking system as well as the fixed panel system at the same tilt angle. It is shown that the energy gain with respect to fixed panels for optimized rotational tracking about the tilted axis is considerably higher than that of the azimuth tracking under clear sky condition. A prototype system is implemented for the tilted axis optimized rotational tracker. Improved performance of the system is demonstrated experimentally.
II. THEORETICAL POTENTIAL OF OPTIMIZED TRACKER ROTATION
Two types of single-axis tracking are considered here: azimuth tracking and optimized rotational tracking about the tilted axis. Azimuth tracking tracks the sun following azimuth angle about the vertical axis where the rotational locus lies along the horizontal plane. On the other hand, optimized rotational tracking tracks the sun with rotation about the tilted axis, where the rotational locus lies on a plane perpendicular to the tilted axis. Figure 1 shows solar zenith angle z and azimuth angle a. Figure 2 shows the schematic representations of the azimuth tracking and optimized rotational tracking systems. In this figure, R, b, and y are the rotation angle, the axis tilt, and the axis azimuth, respectively.
Rotation angle, R is the angular displacement of the collector rotating about its axis with respect to a reference position. When the normal to the collector surface is parallel to the vertical plane, the position is considered as the reference position, where R is 0° [Fig. 3(a)]. When measured from the inclined end, R is positive for clockwise rotation and negative for counter-clockwise rotation. Axis tilt, b is the inclination of the tracker axis from the horizontal plane and ranges from 0° to 90° [Fig. 3(b)]. Axis azimuth, y is the angle in the clockwise direction from the north to the horizontal projection of the tracker axis, which lies within 0° to 360° [Fig. 3(b)].
The angle formed at a point by the sun rays and the line normal to the collector surface is called incidence angle. The rotation of the tracker panel about the tilted axis can be optimized for the maximum cosine of the angle of incidence at a given solar position using the following equation [20]:
where X=sinzsina−y/[sinzcosa−ysinb+cos(z)sinb], and
C is an angle which is used to place R in the correct trigonometric quadrant. To use the appropriate value of C, the difference between the solar azimuth angle and the axis azimuth is to be evaluated such that it falls within ±180° [20]. To evaluate the theoretical potential of optimized tracker rotation about a tilted axis, two different models of energy estimation are adopted. The first model is a clear sky insolation model. In this model, the direct beam radiation on the horizontal surface for a particular day is calculated from the apparent extraterrestrial flux and air mass ratio [21]. The diffused radiation is computed as mentioned in the model developed by Threlkeld and Jordan [22]. In the second model, the concept of the clearness index (the ratio of the horizontal surface radiation to the extraterrestrial horizontal radiation) is invoked. Here, the monthly average of the global irradiation per day on the horizontal surface for a given location is found from the PVGIS database [23], and then the monthly average clearness index is computed [21]. The diffused irradiation on the horizontal surface for a particular month is computed by means of diffuse fraction correlation described by Spencer [24]. The diffused irradiation component can also be calculated by using the diffuse fraction correlation described by Page [25] or Liu and Jordan [26]. The direct beam irradiation on the horizontal surface is calculated from the global horizontal irradiation and the diffused irradiation component [21,27]. In both models, the cosines of the angle of incidence for optimized rotational tracking, azimuth tracking, and fixed panel systems are computed [20,28] from the zenith and azimuth angles (extracted using the SPA-NREL calculator [29]) for a particular time, date, location, and tilt. Then, using the computed cosine of the angle of incidence in the first model, the normalized power curve for each system is obtained [21]. Figure 4 (based on the first model) shows the normalized power curve for the optimized rotational tracking, the azimuth tracking and the fixed panel, respectively, for a given date (October 17, 2017) and location (23.81°N, 90.413°E), where the same tilt angle (24° for the given location) is considered for all three systems.
The area under each power curve is computed to determine the respective total energy extracted by each system for the given period. In the second model, the total irradiation on the collector surface for the given time period is directly computed for each of the three systems [21,27]. Table I compares the energy enhancements calculated with the help of the discussed models for the optimized rotational tracker and the azimuth tracker with respect to the fixed system. The results obtained from each model show that the optimized rotational tracking provides almost double the extracted energy enhancement compared to the azimuth tracking at the location of Dhaka (latitude: 23.81°N) on October 17. The calculations using the second model for a given day require the value of the clearness index for that particular day. Unfortunately, daily average values of the clearness index are not available for Dhaka. We have overcome this limitation by using the monthly average value of the clearness index acknowledging that the average clearness index for a day (0.53 for Dhaka in October) may deviate from the monthly average clearness index. Consequently, our theoretical predictions may not be numerically very accurate. However, since all the models, including the one that does not invoke the concept of the clearness index, exhibit the same trend, we argue that in spite of this approximation, the optimized rotational tracker will extract significantly higher energy than the azimuth tracker at a location whose latitude is similar to that of Dhaka.
Figure 5 shows that the percentage increase in energy extraction of the optimized rotational tracking and the azimuth tracking both with respect to the fixed panel and that of the optimized rotational tracking with respect to the azimuth tracking as a function of latitude on October 17, 2017. For each latitude, the optimum tilt angle is considered. From the figure, it is observed that the improvement in energy extraction for optimized rotational tracking compared to that of azimuth tracking is significantly higher at lower latitudes. As we move towards higher latitudes, the enhancement in energy extraction for optimized rotational tracking diminishes. The simulated results for other days of the year (results not shown) also follow similar trends.
III. ALGORITHM AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 6 shows the block diagram of the system architecture of an open loop single-axis solar tracking system employing optimized rotation about the tilted axis. The initial input data to the system are latitude, longitude, value of the manually adjusted axis tilt angle, Greenwich Mean Time, and the date. The RTC (Real-Time Clock) is initialized according to the initial time and date inputs. At the beginning of the tracking loop, the control unit reads the date and the time from the RTC and calculates the solar azimuth and zenith angles by the PSA (Plataforma Solar de Almeria) algorithm [30]. From the determined azimuth, zenith, and the value of the tilt angle, the optimized tracker rotation angle R is computed using Eq. (1).
The rotation angle values are pre-calibrated against position sensor values (in our prototype, a linear wire wound potentiometer is used). The determined optimum rotation angle is converted to an equivalent position sensing value, designated by P(T), using the calibration data. The current position sensor reading is taken next. The average of multiple readings is considered to reduce the impact of noise or fluctuations. The current position sensor reading is designated by P(I). P(I) is compared to P(T) ± δ, where δ is the maximum allowed error for a given rotational position. If P(I) is not within P(T) ± δ, the motor, operated by the control unit via the motor driver IC, rotates the collector (panel) in the appropriate direction so that the P(I) value converges towards the P(T) value. At this time, P(I) value is updated. The process is repeated until the panel reaches the required tracking position.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
To evaluate the improvement in energy extraction by the single-axis tracker employing optimized rotation about the tilted axis, three identical PV panels are considered for the optimized rotational tracking system, the azimuth tracking system, and the fixed panel system, respectively. The measured specifications of the polycrystalline PV panels at Standard Test Conditions (STCs) are shown in Table II. The test was conducted by an external agency [31]. The total expanded uncertainty for the maximum power is ±0.033 W (±2%).
All the panels are tilted at 24° and are faced towards the south. The experiments are conducted on a building roof, located at 23.81°N, 90.413°E, Dhaka, Bangladesh at a height of 16 m from the ground. Each PV panel is connected to a variable resistive load as shown in Fig. 7(a). For each reading, the variable resistance is adjusted to the value where the maximum power is achieved at the given time. Maximum powers for the three systems are measured simultaneously and recorded at an interval of 30 min. Also, during each reading at a particular time, the optimized tracker rotation angle about the tilted axis executed by the implemented system is measured and recorded.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Figure 8 shows the measured I-V characteristics of the employed PV panels under Standard Test Conditions (STCs). The I-V characteristics, the fill factor (76.7% under STC), and the cell efficiency (17.59% under STC) of our PV panels are comparable to those of typical commercially available larger silicon PV panels. Therefore, the results obtained from the experiments are expected to be scalable to the typical commercial silicon PV panels.
The tracking accuracy of the implemented system is determined in terms of the accuracy of the rotation angle. The measured rotation angles of the optimized tracker with rotation about the tilted axis for two different days (one clear, sunny; the other partially cloudy) are compared with the theoretical values extracted from NREL-SPA [29]. Figures 9(a) and 9(b) show that the magnitude of the maximum error is less than 3°.
The experiments were conducted on October 17, 2017 (clear, sunny day) and October 18, 2017 (partially cloudy day). There was no shading. The measured output powers from the systems for both the days are shown as functions of time in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively. The energy extracted by each panel on each day is calculated from the area under the respective power curves.
The values of the extracted energy for October 17, 2017, for the optimized rotational tracker, the azimuth tracker and the fixed panel are 5054.8 mWh, 4705.8 mWh, and 4212.0 mWh, respectively.
Table III, for October 17, compares the experimentally measured percentage energy enhancements with energy enhancements theoretically computed by the first model and the second model using the Spencer diffuse fraction correlation, Page diffuse fraction correlation, and Liu and Jordan diffuse fraction correlation as discussed in Sec. II (see also Table I). The experimental results shown in Table III are the outcomes of single measurement of each data point without any uncertainty analysis or correction. The theoretical results are only approximate because the value of the clearness index for October 17 (or any other single day) is not known for Dhaka and we have substituted the daily value by the monthly average value of the clearness index in our theoretical calculations with the second model. The theoretical calculation using the first model is also approximate since the clear sky insolation model does not consider any clearness index. The trends predicted by all the theoretical models are similar to those observed experimentally. The good agreement between calculated results of the second model and the experiment may imply that the actual clearness index for October 17 is close to the monthly average value.
For October 18, 2017, the extracted energy values for the optimized rotational tracker, the azimuth tracker, and the fixed panel were 3239.4 mWh, 3217.7 mWh, and 2983.1 mWh, respectively. The percentage enhancements in extracted energy from the optimized tracker and the azimuth tracker are 8.59% and 7.86%, respectively. There had been a cloud-covered sky condition from 7 am to 10 am and again from 1:30 pm to 2:30 pm. During these time periods, the panels mostly received diffused radiation from the sun. Diffused radiation incident on the panel depends on the projected area of the panel on the horizontal plane [21]. Because this projected area is greater for the azimuth tracker and the fixed panel, these panels extract higher energy than the optimized rotational tracker panel. During the sunny sky period, the intensity of direct radiation is higher than that of the diffused radiation. Therefore, the energy extracted by the optimized rotational tracker panel and the azimuth tracker panel is higher than that of the fixed panel.
The experimental results corroborate the theoretical prediction that the optimized rotational tracking can provide significantly higher extracted energy compared to the azimuth tracking at the location of Dhaka in October. However, the relative energy gain by both types of tracking is considerably decreased and even may become less than unity when the sky is cloudy.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We show that a greater amount of energy can be extracted from a single-axis solar tracking PV system with tracker rotation optimized about the tilted axis compared to the azimuth tracking system. The enhancement of energy extraction is greater for smaller latitudes and also for clear sky conditions. A prototype open loop, single-axis, solar tracking PV system is demonstrated. The error in the measured rotation angle is found to be less than ±3°. The enhancement of the energy extraction for the tracker with the optimized rotation about the tilted axis is found to be 20.01% as opposed to that of 11.72% for the azimuth tracking on a clear day at a latitude of 23.81°N. The cloudy sky condition severely degrades the energy enhancement by single-axis trackers and the optimized tracker with rotation about the tilted axis suffers more in this regard.
TABLE I. 
Comparison between percentage energy enhancement by the optimized rotational tracker and the azimuth tracker based on different theoretical models at latitude on 23.81°N on October 17, 2017.
TABLE II. 
Measured PV panel specifications under STC.
TABLE III. 
Comparison between percentage gains by the optimized rotational tracker and azimuth tracker based on the experimental and theoretical results of October 17, 2017 at a latitude of 23.81°N.
TABLE I. -body
Tracking method	First model (%)	Second model (%)
Diffuse fraction correlation
Spencer [24]	Page [25]	Liu and Jordan [26]
Optimized rotational tracker	22.50	19.76	20.34	21.89
Azimuth tracker	11.78	10.13	10.43	11.23
TABLE II. -body
V_{OC}, open circuit voltage	10.953 V
I_{SC}, short circuit current	0.196 A
V_{M}, voltage at maximum power point	8.899 V
I_{M}, current at maximum power point	0.185 A
P_{MP}, maximum power	1.65 W
F.F., fill factor	76.70%
Cell efficiency	17.59%
Dimension	Length: 0.134 m, width: 0.125 m, module area: 0.01675 m^{2}
TABLE III. -body
Tracking method	Percentage energy enhancement
Experimental results	Theoretical estimation considering the monthly average clearness index (second model)	Theoretical estimation with the clear sky insolation model (first model)
Spencer [24]	Page [25]	Liu and Jordan [26]
Optimized rotational tracker	20.01	19.76	20.34	21.89	22.50
Azimuth tracker	11.72	10.13	10.43	11.23	11.78
FIG. 1. 
Solar zenith angle and azimuth angle.
FIG. 2. 
(a) Azimuth tracking and (b) optimized rotational tracking about tilted axis b.
FIG. 3. 
(a) Tracker rotation angle and (b) axis tilt and axis azimuth.
FIG. 4. 
Normalized power vs. time for optimized rotation tracking, azimuth tracking, and fixed panel calculated according to the first model on October 17, 2017, at a latitude of 23.81°N.
FIG. 5. 
Percentage of enhanced energy extraction vs. latitude on October 17, 2017 for: optimized rotational tracking with respect to the fixed panel (a1), azimuth tracking with respect to the fixed panel (a2), and optimized rotational tracking with respect to azimuth tracking (a3).
FIG. 6. 
Architecture of the open loop optimally tilted single-axis tracking system.
FIG. 7. 
The experimental setup: (a) schematic of the PV panel connection with the variable resistive load and (b) photograph of the prototypes.
FIG. 8. 
Measured I-V characteristics of the PV panels used in the experiments under STC.
FIG. 9. 
Error in the rotation angle of the optimized tracker with rotation about the tilted axis for October 17, 2017 (a) and October 18, 2017 (b).
FIG. 10. 
Output power vs. time of the day for the optimized rotational tracker panel, the azimuth tracker panel, and the fixed panel for October 17, 2017 (clear, sunny day) at a latitude of 23.81°N.
FIG. 11. 
Output power vs. time of the day for the optimized rotational tracker panel, the azimuth tracker panel, and the fixed panel for October 18, 2017 (partially cloudy day) at a latitude of 23.81°N.
