Fundamental investigations on the spiking mechanism by means of laser beam welding of ice
In order to gain further understanding on the mechanism of rapid seam depth variations, the so-called spiking, in deep penetration laser beam welding, this effect is analyzed and explained using the example of laser welding of ice. Laser welding of ice provides the advantage that the temporal behavior of the vapor capillary can be analyzed by means of common imaging methods in the visible spectral range. The occurrence of spiking and its frequency is found to depend on the feed rate but is not influenced by instabilities of the rear wall of the capillary. Also, the effect of downward moving structures at the capillary front can be shown to be independent from root spiking. Spiking is found to be governed by a periodically alternating irradiation of the capillary front wall by the incident laser beam in the lower part of the capillary. This is verified by ray-tracing calculations on capillary geometries extracted from high-speed videos. These findings are further substantiated by a transient smoothed particle hydrodynamics model to simulate the melt flow and evaporation at the capillary front that was coupled to the ray-tracing calculation to determine the local absorption of the laser radiation within the capillary.
I. INTRODUCTION
Although deep penetration laser beam welding is a well-established joining technology, several phenomena associated with this process still impose some limitations to its applicability. Beside, e.g., spattering, pore formation, and hot cracking, root spiking, which results in a rapid and repeating fluctuation of the weld seam depth, is one of these effects. Spiking in keyhole welding has been investigated since the late 1960s, but mostly in the context of electron beam welding. A profound and current study regarding spiking and its relation with humping during electron beam welding of aluminum was reported by Wei et_al [1]
The suggested model conceptions to explain the origin of spiking range from a periodic constriction of the capillary [2,3], a periodic melt flow around the capillary [4,5], a nonuniform intensity distribution [6], and an oscillation of the capillary due to a disturbed equilibrium between the dynamic pressure of the melt flow, hydrostatic pressure, and vapor pressure [7]. The latter can also lead to a periodic mass transport downward at the capillary front which was frequently investigated [8–12].
These numerous and different approaches point out that further research is still required to unambiguously find and understand the origin of spiking. Experimentally, the highly dynamic phenomena need to be investigated with high spatial and temporal resolution. For laser beam cutting, this was, e.g., achieved by high-speed imaging of the process performed behind a glass plate [13], by cutting glass itself [14], or by means of adapted geometries (“trim cuts”) [15]. During a real welding process, this can either be achieved by means of in-process X-ray diagnostics or high-speed imaging of welds in transparent materials [16,17].
It was already demonstrated that many of the phenomena observed in laser beam welding of ice can also be found in welding of metals [17,18]. This qualitative similarity is also illustrated by Fig. 1, where the impact of spiking during laser beam welding is compared for welding of steel (a) and ice (b). In both cases, spikes extending to about 20%–30% of the average welding depth are present.
In fact, many physical properties relevant for the laser-material interaction, such as the viscosity, and the heat capacity of water or ice and steel or aluminum are in the same order of magnitude. As shown in Fig. 2, apart from a constant scaling factor concerning the incident laser power, the effectively absorbed intensity of steel at a wavelength of 1 μm has a very similar angular dependence as the absorptivity of water at a wavelength of 10.6 μm for circularly or nonpolarized radiation. We therefore are confident that the knowledge gained by the investigations of the laser welding of ice helps to improve the understanding of the corresponding phenomena observed also in welding of metals.
In the present paper, the phenomenon of spiking is investigated at the example of laser welding of ice, which enables to record the processes at the vapor capillary with ordinary high-speed imaging techniques at high resolutions. The mechanism of spiking is first analyzed experimentally, and then, the irradiation of geometries reconstructed from these videos is calculated and spiking is replicated in a transient simulation. The paper is organized as follows: The experimental setup and process parameters are described in Sec. II. Section III presents the experimental results regarding the influence of the stability of the capillary and moving steps on spiking. In Sec. IV A, the distribution of the absorbed laser intensity is analyzed for capillary geometries extracted from the high-speed videos. Based on this, a spiking mechanism is proposed, which is reproduced in a transient simulation of the welding process in Sec. IV B. In Sec. IV C, the dependence of the spiking frequency on the feed rate and laser power is measured to substantiate the proposed mechanism. A conclusion of the findings is given in Sec. V.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A commercial TLF 5000 CO_{2} laser with a wavelength of 10.6 μm together with a mirror welding optics with a focal length of 280 mm was used for the experimental investigations. The focal spot diameter of the processing beam was 440 μm, with a doughnut-shaped intensity distribution, expected to converge to a Gaussian distribution outside of the focal plane, and its Rayleigh length Z_{R} was 6 mm. Bubble-free ice blocks with a length of 200 mm in welding direction, a thickness of 50 mm and a width of 20 mm, were welded. The ice blocks were moved beneath the fixed optics by a linear axis. The ice was mounted with Styrofoam to defer melting. The welding process was recorded with a high-speed camera with up to 30 000 frames per second. Illumination was provided by a set of halogen lamps whose light was diffused by a screen positioned on the side of the ice block facing away from the camera. An additional direct illumination by one lamp was applied from the same direction as the camera to enhance the visibility of the weld-pool geometry. Welds were performed with different laser powers ranging between 0.75 and 5 kW and feed rates in the range from 1 to 20 m/min.
The parameters for the experimental investigations are summarized in Table I. Two kinds of experiments were conducted: In a first experiment, the focal position was varied relative to the surface of the sample by vertically moving the welding optics during the welding process, while the feed rate and laser power were kept constant. This procedure allows to change the process stability within the welding process without changing parameters other than the focal position, as there is a strong dependence of the stability of the capillary on the focal position. In a second series, welds were performed at different combinations of laser powers and feed rates, with the focal position set on the upper surface of the ice block. This allowed determining the influence of the feed rate on the spiking frequency.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Spiking frequency is unaffected by stability of the rear capillary wall
The stability of the laser welding process was varied by shifting the focal position relative to the surface of the ice block to analyze the influence of the stability of the capillary on the formation of root spiking.
Within the welding process, the focal position was continuously shifted from 10 mm above the surface to −10 mm below the surface, which corresponds to ±167% of the Rayleigh length Z_{R} of the processing beam. Two frames out of a recorded high-speed video are shown in Fig. 3, corresponding to a stable [Fig. 3(a), with focal position 8 mm above the surface] and an instable process [Fig. 3(b), with focal position 5.5 mm below the surface] regime within a weld performed with a laser power of 0.75 kW and a feed rate of 4 m/min. For every frame in the high-speed videos, the position of the capillary tip (red markers in Fig. 3) and the root of the weld seam (black lines in Fig. 3) were tracked to quantify the spiking process. In this paper, the welding process is referred to as “stable” when the capillary remains open all the time and the capillary depth varies smoothly [compare Fig. 3(a) and video]. The rear wall never protrudes into the laser beam and keeps separated from the front wall. In the process described above, this is the case for a focal position ranging from +167% to +60% of Z_{R} above the surface and from −126% to −167% below the surface. For focal positions from +60% of Z_{R} down to −126% of Z_{R}, the process is instable. The process is referred to as “instable” when parts of the capillary collapse, typically initiated from the rear side of the capillary [compare Fig. 3(b) and video], leading to a constriction [“C” in Fig. 3(b)] of the capillary followed by an abrupt change of the capillary depth, as the part below the constriction collapses. Consecutive collapses and extensions of the capillary can occur within a short time, repeatedly penetrating into the same root spike. Thereby, air-filled bubbles can form from the remains of the previous capillary. The frequency of spiking is on average the same for both regimes [nine spikes in the weld seam in Fig. 3(a) and ten spikes in Fig. 3(b)].
The total trajectory of the capillary depth and the weld seam root throughout the same welding process are shown in Fig. 4 by the red curve and the black line, respectively. A strong dependence of the average capillary depth on the focal position was found. It varies between 7 and 18 mm while the focal position changes from +10 mm above the ice surface to −10 mm into the ice. The maximum capillary depth is reached when the focus is positioned close to the surface.
In the following, the typical spiking sequences are discussed separately for the stable and the instable welding process, at the sequences marked with the intervals A and C in Fig. 4. The influence of melt transport at the front wall is then investigated at the example of interval B.
As shown in Fig. 5, in the stable process range each cycle of growth and retraction of the capillary generates one root spike. The lengths of the spikes, defined as the vertical distance between the minima and maxima of the weld seam root, are about 1 mm or 15% of the average capillary depth. A capillary geometry typical for interval A is depicted in Fig. 5(a). The trajectory of the capillary tip throughout this interval, together with the resultant root spiking, is depicted in Fig. 5(b). Four characteristic stages within the spiking cycle are labeled by the numerals (1) to (4) at two exemplary spikes. The labels correspond to the beginning of a spike (1), the expansion phase of the capillary (2), the point where the capillary reaches the maximum length (3), and the retraction (4) of the capillary.
To visualize the above-described evolution of the spiking process, this trajectory is plotted in an earth-fixed coordinate system in Fig. 6(a). The same data as in Fig. 5(b), corrected for the feed and the average depth of the capillary, are plotted. From this earth-fixed representation of the trajectory, the averaged velocity field pattern of the moving capillary tip is calculated and depicted in Fig. 6(b). Starting from the point of minimum capillary depth [stage 1 in Figs. 5(b) and 6], the capillary first expands in an almost vertical direction. This expansion occurs in a quite smooth manner and with expansion velocities of up to 180 mm/s. As the capillary expands, the lower part of the capillary front starts to lag behind the translational movement [stage 2 in Figs. 5(b) and 6] of the upper part of the front, which moves evenly at the velocity given by the feed rate. Hence, the lower part of the capillary starts to bend backward. The vertical growth of the capillary first still continues further even when no direct illumination of the tip is possible, but at a certain point this ceases and the tip is only moved along with the base material [stage 3 in Figs. 5(b) and 6]. Shortly after that, the capillary starts to retract [stage 4 in Figs. 5(b) and 6] with velocities of about 360 mm/s, faster and typically more unregularly than the expansion. Finally, the deepest point of the vapor capillary moves or jumps to the origin of the newly formed spike (stage 1 again) as the just formed root spike is filled with water. This cycle is found to repeat with an average frequency of 75 Hz and resulting in one root spike for each cycle.
Within the range of focal positions from +60% of Z_{R} above the surface, to −126% of Z_{R} into the ice block, the process is instable. The instabilities are characterized by a rapid and irregularly repeating collapse and re-expansion of the capillary surrounded by melt. Figure 7(a) shows a typical capillary geometry recorded in the instable regime marked by the interval C in Fig. 4. For this interval, the trajectory of the capillary depth, together with the resultant root of the weld seam is illustrated in Fig. 7(b). Here, the average depth fluctuation of the capillary is about 3 mm or 25% of the average capillary length. Typically, the rear wall of the capillary repeatedly locally penetrates into the laser path, which is evidence of fluid-dynamic interactions, that have been presumed to be responsible for spiking in the previous publications [2–4]. When this happens, the evaporation below this obstacle stops rapidly and the lower part of the capillary collapses. After a collapse, the rapidly reemerging capillary often again intrudes into the same, already formed spike of the weld root. In interval C, this occurs at a frequency of about 5 to 10 times the root spiking frequency. Neither the shape of the front wall nor the geometry of the afore-drilled root spike is influenced by such a collapse (compare also Fig. 7).
The frequency of the root spiking is not affected by the frequent collapses of the capillary as it was found to still constantly stay at a value of 75 Hz. For comparison to Fig. 6 (stable regime), the trajectory of the capillary tip observed in the instable interval C is also plotted in an earth-fixed system in Fig. 8(a) together with the averaged velocity field of the movement of the capillary tip in Fig. 8(b).
The expansion velocities of the capillary tip can reach 700 mm/s, whereas the retraction can happen instantaneously when several millimeters of the capillary collapse radially between two consecutive frames. Due to this rather chaotic process, the velocity field pattern observed in the instable regime is much less uniform than the one shown in Fig. 6(b) for the stable regime.
To summarize, the average temporal spiking frequency of the root of the weld pool was found to be constant at 75 Hz throughout the whole welding process and independent of the process stability [e.g., 6 to 7 spikes per 6 mm in both detailed plots in Figs. 5(b) and 7(b)]. In the instable regime, the capillary expands several times within one and the same root spike. These instabilities, which are related to the fluid dynamics behind the capillary, were therefore found to have no influence on the occurrence and the frequency of root spiking. We may therefore conclude that instabilities of the rear wall caused by melt flow are not the driving force of root spiking in laser welding of ice.
B. Spiking frequency is unaffected by moving steps at the capillary front
Throughout the recorded welding processes, small steplike structures can be observed running down the front of the capillary. This phenomenon is known from various reports on beam welding of metals [8–12] and has further been described in laser beam cutting, with CO_{2} and fiber lasers [13,24]. During electron beam welding, such structures were observed to move with velocities of 1.2 m/s, while for laser welding of stainless steel, the reported velocities are in the range between 5 and 12 m/s, depending on process parameters.
In order to investigate a possible impact of this phenomenon on the behavior of root spiking, we have extracted the trajectories of the moving structures on the front of the capillary from the high-speed videos taken from the welding process in ice. Figure 9 shows the trajectories observed in a representative sequence recorded within interval B of Fig. 4. Mostly, one such steplike structure was observed on the front of the capillary at the same time, sometimes two or three but not more. The average velocity was found to be 15.7 m/s, which is in the same velocity range as reported for laser welding of metals [8–12]. These steps occur at a frequency of about 1700 Hz and are therefore unlikely to be related to the root spiking which occurs at a frequency of 75 Hz.
Hence, neither melt flow phenomena (both at the front and rear wall of the capillary) nor the instabilities of the capillary itself can be the cause of root spiking in ice or influence its basic properties.
IV. MODELING
A. Distribution of the absorbed intensity
The illumination of the capillary was modeled by means of ray tracing [25,26]. To this end, the projection of the capillary into the plane spanned by the axis of the laser beam and the feed rate [as shown in Fig. 5(a)] was retrieved from the high-speed videos. On the top, the lateral width of the capillary was assumed equal to the diameter of the laser beam and is linearly decreased to zero toward the tip of the capillary. The front was modeled to be a half circle, and the sidewalls were assumed to be planar. A Ball-Pivoting Algorithm was used to implement this surface in the numerical code [27]. The surface was represented by a total of 45 000 triangular elements with varying resolution—the element density being four times higher at the capillary front as compared to the sidewalls. The focal position was set to 8.3 mm above the upper edge of the ice block, corresponding to zone A in Fig. 4. The beam properties given in Sec. II were used, and a Gaussian intensity distribution was implemented due to the distance from the focal plane of the beam to the tip of the capillary of about three Rayleigh lengths. The values of the (complex) refractive index were set to n = 1.174 and k = 0.0764 [22]. The resulting distributions of the absorbed laser intensity is shown in Fig. 10 for two different capillaries; one corresponding to the maximum extension of one spiking cycle [Fig. 10(a)] and the other corresponding to the following minimum [Fig. 10(b)]. The latter is also the starting point for a new spiking cycle.
The intensities found along the midline through the front and rear wall of the same two capillaries are shown in Fig. 11. Here, geometry MAX corresponds to the capillary shown in Fig. 10(a) and geometry MIN to Fig. 10(b).
In both cases, the shape as well as the distribution of the absorbed intensity is almost identical at the upper part of the capillary. The illumination differs however at the lower part of the capillary, starting from −6.3 mm in Fig. 11 to the tip where the spiking takes place. At the beginning of a new spike, the front wall is illuminated more or less homogeneously all the way down to the very tip, where the absorbed intensity is about 2.5 times higher than anywhere else [red line in Fig. 11(b), geometry MIN]. The absorbed intensity is sufficient to melt the ice at the front and to expand the capillary by excessive evaporation in vertical direction. As the capillary expands, the intensity at the lower part of the front decreases as may be expected already due to the increasing surface area. At the maximum extension of the capillary during a spiking cycle, high intensity fluctuations are present at the lower part of the capillary (geometry MAX). The absorbed intensity drops down to less than 1% of the average intensity (Fig. 11, geometry MAX, sections L at front) before it rises again in the tip due to reflections at the capillary walls. Nevertheless, the absorbed intensity at the tip is only about one fourth of the value at the beginning of the cycle.
The growth of the capillary length is therefore terminated, and at the same time, the absorbed intensity in the lower regions is too low to melt the entire inflow of ice, which is why this section of the capillary lags behind. At this point, the highest absorbed intensity at the front wall is not found near the tip of the capillary anymore, but about 1.5 mm above (marked S in Fig. 11). Here, the high intensity can stimulate excessive evaporation resulting in the new spike to be formed at this point into the solid material, when the lower part of the capillary is lagging behind far enough.
One may therefore conclude that spiking is driven by the distribution of the intensity that is absorbed at the lower front wall of the capillary. The permanent changes of the geometry induced by the varying intensity distribution result in a periodically fluctuating depth of the capillary as the absorbed intensity is on its turn influenced by the geometry in a feedbacklike mechanism. Instabilities of the melt flow (as discussed in Sec. III) do not drive the spiking mechanism; they rather add a certain amount of noise on top of the spiking behavior that is however dominated by the varying irradiation of the capillary front.
The proposed mechanism of spiking is schematically depicted in Fig. 12. At the start of a spiking cycle, a high concentration of laser power is found at the lower front wall and the tip of the capillary (marked with h in picture 1 of Fig. 12). Here, excessive evaporation occurs, and as a consequence, the capillary expands predominantly downward. During this expansion, the absorbed intensity at the lower capillary front decreases, while the intensity absorbed at the tip is still sufficient for a further expansion of the capillary by excessive evaporation (picture 2 of Fig. 12). The capillary still expands but then starts to bend backward, as not all of the inflowing ice can be molten (picture 3 of Fig. 12). Finally, the intensity absorbed at the tip is too low for further expansion of the capillary and a new spike is initiated at a higher position at the front wall, where the strong bending of the capillary front leads to an again increased amount of absorbed intensity (marked with h in picture 4 of Fig. 12)
This proposed explanation for the spiking mechanism can be examined by means of transient simulations, which take into account the interplay between the beam propagation in the capillary, the changing geometry of the capillary and the resulting distribution of the absorbed intensity in a hydrodynamic model of the process. As discussed in Sec. IV B, this allows to numerically reproduce the complete spiking cycle with high temporal resolution also with negligible influence by the melt flow dynamics, which further supports the suggestion, that spiking is primarily initiated by variations of the intensity distribution.
B. Hydrodynamic simulation at the capillary front wall
Time-resolved simulations of the welding process were performed with the aim to further validate the proposed spiking mechanism. The transient process simulations allowed to resolve the intermediate stages of the spiking cycle and model the evolution of the weld seam in a continuous manner. As the rear wall was only considered at the lowest part of the capillary to reduce the computational efforts, the present simulation inherently excludes the effects caused by an unstable rear wall of the capillary. The spiking behavior, which is predicted by this simulation including this simplification, therefore further supports the hypothesis that the instabilities of the melt flow are not the original causes of spiking. The simulations on the other hand confirm that spiking is initiated by the periodic redistribution of the absorbed intensity at the capillary front.
The simulations are based on the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method. As a meshless Lagrangian particle method, SPH may be applied to problems with free surfaces, large deformations, and fluid-structure interaction where the tracking of interfaces is of relevance [28,29]. An approach of modeling laser welding processes with SPH has been described recently by coupling an SPH model to the ray-tracing program mentioned earlier [30]. During the simulation process, the geometry of the capillary is repeatedly extracted and transferred to the ray-tracing program at a rate given by the so-called coupling time interval that is one of the simulation parameters. A Ball-Pivoting Algorithm is applied for all particles that are in the vicinity of the capillary front to reconstruct the surface [27]. The distribution of the absorbed intensity calculated by the ray tracing is then fed back to the SPH model as the heating source.
The SPH simulation of the fluid dynamics was implemented using the software Pasimodo [31]. For the simulation, the same process parameters as described in Sec. III were applied. The workpiece was discretized with approximately 700 000 particles and an initial particle distance of 100 μm, corresponding to a 12 mm long, 3 mm wide, and 18 mm thick ice block. The coupling time interval was chosen to be 50 μs, corresponding to about 250 time steps within the measured duration of one spiking cycle. 500 000 rays were tracked at each coupling time step in the ray-tracing routine, which was applied as described in Sec. IV A, assuming a Gaussian intensity distribution. An overall process duration of about 70 ms was simulated. In Fig. 13, two resultant capillary geometries are shown, occurring at a temporal distance of 0.5 ms. With 10 mm, the maximum depth of the simulated capillary deviates from the measured depth; however, the phenomenon of steplike structures moving down the front wall is well reproduced. The differences in the absolute values may on the one hand result from the inaccuracy of the surface detection and reconstruction, especially at the lower tip of the capillary. On the other hand, an even finer discretization and an even smaller coupling time interval between SPH simulations and raytracing calculations are required to fully capture the dynamics of the changing capillary. Further work will be required to also allow computing longer process sequences.
In the simulation, steplike structures, which move downward with a speed of up to 2 m/s, can be identified at the capillary front. Compared with the experiments, the steps in the SPH simulations are larger and move at a lower velocity. Nevertheless, the simulations support the assumption that the moving steps have no impact on the spikes, as they occur at a much higher frequency and move with a much faster speed. Additionally, they fade mostly before reaching the tip of the capillary.
When the simulation continues, we are able to observe the spiking mechanism in ice, as seen from Fig. 14 which shows the resulting weld seam geometry (blue) as extracted from the interfaces to the solid material (gray) and the correspondingly tracked and illuminated capillary geometry. The root of the weld seam shows the depth fluctuations, which are characteristic for root spiking. The extension (1.9 mm or 20% of the capillary depth) and the frequency of the simulated spikes are close to the values observed experimentally. In general, the spiking mechanism, however, appears to be less pronounced and to develop more smoothly in the simulations. In order to improve the spatial resolution at the capillary tip without excessively increasing the computational efforts, the implementation of an adaptive discretization scheme is planned for future simulations.
Despite the quantitative differences between the experimental findings and the results obtained at the present stage of the simulations, the physical phenomena during the laser welding process can be reproduced with a validity that allows first the conclusions on the influence of the various effects on the spiking behavior. The fact that spiking occurred in the simulation, despite neglecting the influence of the rear wall and was found to be independent from the also replicated steplike structures at the capillary front further supports the assumption that spiking is driven primarily by the changing distribution of the absorbed intensity on the capillary front.
C. Experimental reconsideration
If the concentration of the absorbed intensity, described in Fig. 12, causes the expansion of the capillary, while the subsequently reduced illumination of the lower parts of the capillary front is the reason for the bending (and finally the retraction) of the capillary, then increasing the feed rate should result in higher spiking frequencies as the lower part of the capillary will be pushed backward more quickly giving way for a new spike to form. This presumption was verified by measuring the dependency of the spiking frequency on the feed rate again by analyzing the recorded high-speed videos. The result is shown in Fig. 15. An almost linear relation between the feed rate and average spiking frequency is found with an increase in the spiking frequency by 15.3 Hz/(m/min) of the feed rate. The coefficient of determination R^{2} of the regression is 0.94. No significant influence of the average laser power on the spiking frequency was found.
Additionally, for velocities higher than 10 m/min the rear wall of the capillary often did not at all interfere with the laser beam as it was trailing at a large distance. Still spiking was present. This again confirms the statement in Sec. III that fluid-dynamic processes occurring at the rear capillary wall cannot be the reason for spiking in ice.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Based on experimental and numerical investigations performed at the example of welding of ice, we have shown that rather than fluid-dynamic phenomena the distribution of the intensity absorbed at the front wall of the capillary causes the periodic changes of depth of the weld seam root. In particular, the following conclusions can be drawn:
(1) Fluid-dynamic instabilities of the walls of the vapor capillary are not responsible for root spiking.
(2) It is equally unlikely that moving steps at the capillary front wall are the source of spiking since the correspondent frequencies differ by more than 1 order of magnitude. This was observed in both the experiments and simulations.
(3) Spiking is caused by a periodically changing distribution of the absorbed laser intensity in the lower part of the vapor capillary and the resulting adaption of the capillary geometry.
(4) Transient simulations of the laser beam welding process of ice substantiated the proposed spiking mechanism, as spiking was numerically reproduced although the phenomena at the rear wall have been neglected and the moving steps at the front were found to fade before they can influence the depth of the capillary.
The conclusion that the intensity distribution in the capillary is responsible for spiking underlines the importance to further investigate potential countermeasures against depth fluctuations during laser beam welding such as spatial beam oscillation or power modulation.
TABLE I. 
Experimental parameters.
TABLE I. -body
General parameters
Laser	TLF 5000 CO_{2}
Rayleigh length	6 mm
Focal spot diameter	440 μm
Material	Ice at −11 °C
Experimental series
Experiments	Laser power (kW)	Feed rate (m/min)	Defocusing (mm)
1 (Sec. III)	0.75	4	+10 to −10
2 (Sec. IV)	0.75–5	2–20	0
FIG. 1. 
Observation of root spiking occurring during deep penetration laser welding. (a) Longitudinal cross section of a weld performed in stainless steel processed with a disk laser with a power of 0.1 kW and a feed rate of 3 m/min (Ref [19]). (b) Frame from a high-speed video showing the cross-sectional view of welding in ice with a CO_{2} laser with a power of 0.75 kW and a feed rate of 4 m/min. The position of the laser beam is sketched in red.
FIG. 2. 
Fraction of the intensity that is absorbed on a tilted surface, normalized to the fraction of absorbed intensity at normal incidence. The plots are based on the Fresnel equations and take into account the projection of the incident intensity on the tilted plane by the factor cos(φ) (Ref [20]). The values given in (a) are for liquid iron at a wavelength of 1.06 μm, with a refractive index of n = 3.6 and an extinction coefficient of k = 5 calculated at melting temperature (1811 K) (Ref [21]) and in (b) for water at a wavelength of 10.6 μm, with n = 1.174 and k = 0.0764 (Ref [22]). The temperature dependence of the absorptivity of water is negligible (Ref [23]).
FIG. 3. 
Frames out of a high-speed video of a laser welding process of ice using a CO_{2} laser with a power of 0.75 kW and a feed rate of 4 m/min. (a) Focal position 8.0 mm above the surface, resulting in a stable process. Spiking is present as the capillary tip (red marker) periodically changes depth, resulting in the fluctuating depth of the weld seam (black line). (b) Focal position −5.5 mm below the surface, resulting in an instable process, dominated by bulging of the rear wall of the capillary wall and constrictions of the capillary at locations well above these bulges (“C”). The depth of the weld seam varies with the same average frequency as in the stable regime [nine spikes in (a) and ten spikes in (b)]. (enhanced online) [URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2351/1.4986641.1]10.2351/1.4986641.1 [URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2351/1.4986641.2]10.2351/1.4986641.2
FIG. 4. 
Measured capillary depth (red line) along the welding path together with the resulting root of the weld pool (black line). The weld was generated using a CO_{2} laser with a power of 0.75 kW and a feed rate of 4 m/min. The varying focus position is indicated above the graph. The instable process regime is highlighted in orange. The intervals A, B, and C indicate the sections that are analyzed further, see text.
FIG. 5. 
(a) Photograph of a typical capillary geometry of the stable process. The weld root is traced by a solid black line for better visibility. The focal position was about 8.18 mm above the ice surface, corresponding to interval A in Fig. 4. (b) Plot of the consecutive positions of the seam root—the solid/liquid interface—(black curve) and the capillary tip colored according to its velocity. The numerals (1)–(4), which are marked in two exemplary spikes, indicate the four stages within the spiking cycle.
FIG. 6. 
(a) Measured trajectory of the capillary tip in an earth-fixed coordinate system corresponding to the capillary path in Fig. 5(b), with the same orientation of the y-axis, negative values corresponding to deeper positions of the capillary tip. The stages (1)–(4) during the spiking cycle correspond to the labels at the exemplary spikes in Fig. 5(b). (b) Averaged velocity field of the motion of the capillary tip corresponding to the trajectory shown in (a). The color and the length of the arrows indicate the velocity of the tip velocity in the earth-fixed coordinate system.
FIG. 7. 
(a) Photograph of a typical capillary geometry of the instable process. The weld root is traced by a solid black line for better visibility. The focal position was about 5.67 mm below the ice surface, corresponding to interval C in Fig. 4. (b) Plot of the consecutive positions of the capillary tip, colored according to its velocity together with the solid/liquid interface (black line).
FIG. 8. 
(a) Measured trajectory of the capillary tip in an earth-fixed coordinate system corresponding to the capillary path in Fig. 7(b). (b) Averaged velocity field of the motion of the capillary tip corresponding to the trajectory shown in Fig. 8(a). The color and the length of the arrows indicate the velocity of the tip relative to an earth-fixed coordinate system.
FIG. 9. 
Measured trajectories of steplike structures running down the capillary front during laser beam welding of ice with a feed rate of 4 m/min and laser power of 0.75 kW. The focal position was 0.64 mm above the surface of the ice block, corresponding to interval B in Fig. 4. The average velocity of the steps is 15.7 m/s and the average occurrence frequency is 1720 Hz.
FIG. 10. 
Distribution of the absorbed intensity calculated by means of ray tracing. The two pictures correspond to the maximum [MAX, (a)] and the following minimum [MIN, (b)] extension of the capillary during one spiking cycle.
FIG. 11. 
(a) Computed distribution of the absorbed intensity in the capillary geometries shown in Fig. 10. Geometry MAX corresponds to Fig. 10(a) and geometry MIN to Fig. 10(b). (b) Absorbed intensity at the capillary front wall for both geometries.
FIG. 12. 
Schematic illustration of the four stages within one spiking cycle. The literals “l”—low, “m”—medium and “h”—high qualitatively denote the local level of the absorbed laser intensity. At locations indicated with “h,” the absorbed intensity is sufficient to cause an excessive evaporation and expansion of the capillary. (1) Early stage in the spiking cycle with high intensity at the lower part of the capillary front wall and the tip. The capillary expands in the direction of the black arrow. (2) The intensity at the front wall (m) is sufficient and uniform enough to sustain the capillary (hence only minor bending of the capillary occurs) and still so high in the tip (h) to further expand the capillary in downward direction. (3) As the absorbed intensity on parts of the lower front wall (l) is significantly reduced, the capillary starts to bend backward; the absorbed intensity at the capillary tip (h) is still high and the expansion therefore continues. (4) The absorbed intensity in the upper part of the bent capillary section is increased (h) due to the reduced angle of incidence. As a consequence, the radiation reaching the tip is reduced and is not sufficient to keep open the capillary tip, which fills with melt (or water). A new capillary tip starts to be formed instead at the location (h) as indicated by the black arrow in picture (4). This will initiate the generation of a new spike.
FIG. 13. 
Simulated capillary geometries with intensity distributions of the absorbed laser radiation (red: high intensity, blue: low intensity) at the time instants 30.2 (left) and 30.7 ms (right) during welding of ice with a feed rate of 4 m/min and a laser power of 0.75 kW with the focal position on the surface of the ice block. Within 0.5 ms, the steps (red markers) at the capillary front moved downward by up to 1 mm, which corresponds to a moving speed of around 2 m/s.
FIG. 14. 
Resulting weld seam geometry extracted from the numerical simulation. Regions colored in blue represent the domains that are molten and/or evaporated during the process. The solid unmolten ice is colored in gray. A feed rate of 4 m/min and a laser power of 0.75 kW were assumed for this simulation. The focal position was on the surface of the ice block.
FIG. 15. 
Measured spiking frequency as a function of the feed rate for different laser powers, averaged over 35 to 70 spikes. The vertical bars denote one standard deviation. The black dotted line indicates a linear fit to the data points.
