Two states or not two states: Single-molecule folding studies of protein L
Experimental tools of increasing sophistication have been employed in recent years to study protein folding and misfolding. Folding is considered a complex process, and one way to address it is by studying small proteins, which seemingly possess a simple energy landscape with essentially only two stable states, either folded or unfolded. The B1-IgG binding domain of protein L (PL) is considered a model two-state folder, based on measurements using a wide range of experimental techniques. We applied single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) spectroscopy in conjunction with a hidden Markov model analysis to fully characterize the energy landscape of PL and to extract the kinetic properties of individual molecules of the protein. Surprisingly, our studies revealed the existence of a third state, hidden under the two-state behavior of PL due to its small population, ∼7%. We propose that this minority intermediate involves partial unfolding of the two C-terminal β strands of PL. Our work demonstrates that single-molecule FRET spectroscopy can be a powerful tool for a comprehensive description of the folding dynamics of proteins, capable of detecting and characterizing relatively rare metastable states that are difficult to observe in ensemble studies.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the living cell, most proteins are folded into a unique native state, which is thermodynamically stable and fully functional. The seminal work of Jackson and Fersht on chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 taught us that small single-domain proteins may fold without populating any intermediate states [1]. Multiple such proteins have since been characterized and shown to possess only two states, either folded or unfolded [2,3]. Typically two-state folding is inferred based on the chevron-like appearance of plots of folding rates vs. denaturant concentrations, on a comparison of folding kinetics and thermodynamics or on a comparison of denaturation curves obtained with several different observables, such as tryptophan fluorescence and circular dichroism. Recent single-molecule experiments have provided a new criterion for two-state folding, based on the observation of a bimodal distribution in single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET) efficiency histograms [4–6]. These specific approaches for verifying two-state folding are not sensitive to the appearance of an intermediate state that is only rarely populated. Modern NMR spectroscopy can identify rare folding intermediates, but only if they exchange on the millisecond time scale or faster [7]. SmFRET spectroscopy on immobilized molecules [8–10] holds the potential to detect rare intermediates with lifetimes of milliseconds to seconds, as these would show up directly in single-molecule trajectories. Herein we report smFRET experiments on a well-studied “two-state protein” that point to a rare off-pathway third state.
The B1 domain of protein L (hereafter called simply protein L, PL) is a 64-residue globular protein, whose structure involves a four-stranded β-sheet packed against a single α-helix, with two β-hairpin motifs [Fig. 1(a)]. The first β-hairpin contains a classic type I turn, but a conformational strain exists in the second β-hairpin due to consecutive positive backbone φ-angles [11]. The folding reaction of PL was studied using a large set of ensemble kinetics and equilibrium experiments and was found to proceed in a two-state manner. In particular, guanidinium chloride (GdmCl) induced equilibrium denaturation curves measured by fluorescence and circular dichroism nicely superimposed on each other [12]. Kinetics of folding/unfolding showed a single exponential behavior over a broad range of GdmCl concentrations [13] and temperatures [14], and no rollover effect was detected in chevron plots at low GdmCl concentrations [13]. Pulsed hydrogen exchange refolding experiments showed a concerted transition from a species with very little protection against exchange to a fully protected species (the native state) and did not detect any partially protected species [15].
In this paper, we revisited the folding of PL using smFRET spectroscopy. We trapped individual PL molecules labeled with donor and acceptor probes within surface-tethered vesicles and measured their fluorescence as a function of time and over a range of solution conditions. Vesicle immobilization had been developed some time ago in our lab as a method for single-molecule spectroscopy over extended periods of time [16]. It has since been used quite extensively by us [8,9,17,18] and others [19–23]. The analysis of single-molecule trajectories obtained from vesicle-encapsulated PL molecules showed that while two-state behavior dominates the folding of this protein to a large extent, there is a small population of a third state, situated off the main folding pathway, but connected to both folded and unfolded states.
II. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. smFRET trajectories of PL
In order to track the folding dynamics of individual PL molecules, we labeled them with two fluorescent dyes, at positions 16 and 65 [Fig. 1(a)]. For details on protein biochemistry as well as other experimental details, see the Methods section in the supplementary material. smFRET experiments on freely diffusing labeled molecules (Fig. S1 of the supplementary material) and on immobilized molecules [Fig. 1(b)] in the presence of GdmCl showed good separation between the folded peak (at a FRET efficiency of 0.92) and the unfolded peak (at a FRET efficiency of 0.45). GdmCl denaturation curves based on the FRET efficiency, both from bulk measurements and from the single-molecule experiments (Fig. S2 of the supplementary material), showed that the stability of the double-labeled protein (4.9 ± 0.1 kcal/mol) is similar to that of the wild type (WT, 4.6 ± 0.2 kcal/mol) [12].
In order to observe single-molecule dynamics over extended periods of time and to extract kinetic information from the trajectories, PL molecules were encapsulated within surface-tethered liposomes. Single-molecule trajectories were collected using a home-built automated single-molecule spectrometer [9]. The donor fluorophore was illuminated using a focused laser beam and emitted photons were divided into donor and acceptor channels. The photons were binned and the FRET efficiency was calculated for each time bin. Initially we illuminated the molecules continuously. Due to the high photobleaching rates, which shortened the trajectories considerably, only a small percentage of the trajectories (20%) exhibited transitions between folded and unfolded states. In order to increase the number of observed transitions, we employed an intermittent illumination scheme, described fully in the Methods section of the supplementary material. This scheme increased dramatically the observation time for each molecule to nearly ∼20 s on the average.
We initially collected single-molecule data in the presence of 2.5M GdmCl, i.e., at the folding transition midpoint of PL (Fig. S2 of the supplementary material). A series of computational filters were applied to ensure that only trajectories generated by individual molecules were included in the analysis and to prevent the occurrence of various artifacts (see the Methods section of the supplementary material). Typically, out of ∼15 000 trajectories, ∼1500 valid trajectories remained in each data set following this filtration. Inspection of these trajectories revealed that transitions between FRET efficiency levels corresponding to the folded state (0.9) and the unfolded state (0.45) were most commonly observed. Three sample trajectories are shown in Fig. 2. Unexpectedly, in some trajectories, we saw transitions that involved an intermediate value with a FRET efficiency of 0.6 (Fig. 3). Transitions involving this intermediate value were observed to lead to and from the unfolded state and to and from the folded state, and also to connect the unfolded and folded states. Data collected over a range of GdmCl concentrations, between 2.1M and 3.0M, showed a small gradual increase of the population of the intermediate state, from 6% to 12%.
B. Analysis of single-molecule data
We applied a model-free change-point algorithm [24] to identify transitions in smFRET trajectories. A two-dimensional transition density map was then constructed, based on the initial and final FRET efficiency values for each transition [Fig. 4(a)]. The transition density map showed the transitions between the two major states, folded and unfolded, with a FRET efficiency difference of ∼0.5, although additional transitions, not involving these two states, could also be observed [Fig. 4(a), circled in red].
In order to obtain a full kinetic description of the folding-unfolding transitions of PL, including the minority intermediate state, a maximum likelihood estimation technique based on hidden Markov models (HMMs) [9,25] was applied to the data. The HMM analysis parses a data set in terms of N discrete states, each represented by a distribution of FRET efficiency values (we take this distribution to be Gaussian). The dynamics of interconversion between these states are assumed to be Markovian. As in our previous work [9], two important modifications of the standard HMM algorithm were introduced. First, we required that the dynamics obey detailed balance so that the flux from any equilibrium state i to any state j equals the inverse flux. Second, we added an additional state, representing the photobleached molecules and therefore connected by a one-way transition to each of the equilibrium states. The introduction of this extra state allowed us to correct for the state-dependent photobleaching rate in a natural way. We used the Baum-Welch algorithm [25] in order to obtain a maximum likelihood estimate of the HMM parameters.
The results of the HMM analysis with three states are shown in Fig. 4(b) for trajectories measured under transition midpoint conditions (2.5M GdmCl). It was found that the state corresponding to the intermediate FRET efficiency level was populated only 7% of the time, while most of the population resided in either the folded or unfolded states (∼46.5% each). This low equilibrium propensity (corresponding to an energy difference of ∼1.2 Kcal/mol) could be explained kinetically by the relatively slow rates of the transition from the folded and unfolded states into the intermediate, combined with significantly faster rates for the back transitions. This picture led us to the conclusion that most of the folding/unfolding flux goes directly between the folded and unfolded states and rarely involves the intermediate. Using the Viterbi algorithm, we assigned sections of single-molecule trajectories to each of the states and calculated that 26% of the trajectories included transitions to and from the intermediate FRET efficiency level. The Viterbi assignments were also used for plotting state-dependent FRET efficiency histograms [Fig. 4(c)]. This procedure made it possible to clearly observe the low intermediate state population between the highly populated folded and unfolded states. A dwell time distribution for each one of the states was calculated and found to fit nicely to a single-exponential function (Fig. S3 of the supplementary material), which indicated that the HMM analysis with three states accounted well for the data.
C. Comparison to stopped-flow kinetic measurements
An interesting question that immediately arises from the above analysis is why the intermediate state was not observed in ensemble experiments. To obtain an answer, a series of stopped-flow experiments were performed on the double-labeled protein over a range of GdmCl concentrations, with donor emission serving as the observable. Each data set, measured at a different denaturant concentration, was fitted well to a single exponential decay function. The rate constants obtained from these fits, k_{obs}, were then compared to the sum of the rates of interconversion between the two major states (F and U) extracted from the HMM analysis [Fig. 5(a)]. A nice agreement was found between the two experiments, indicating that the two major states dominate the observed kinetics.
To go beyond a comparison of kinetic rates, the parameters from the HMM analysis were then used to simulate the temporal course of stopped-flow experiments. Using the full transition probability matrix (A) from the three-state analysis, we calculated the time-dependent state propensity vector as follows:
where Δt is the time step in the smFRET trajectories and P(0) is the row vector of initial propensities. Since the stopped-flow experiments involved a jump from one denaturant concentration to another, we assumed that initially only a single state is populated, either folded or unfolded. Therefore, P(0) was taken as either (1,0,0) for experiments starting at the folded state or (0,0,1) for experiments starting at the unfolded state. The time propagation was then calculated with the transition probability matrix suitable for the final concentration after mixing. The observed FRET efficiency at time t, E_{Obs}(t), was then calculated using
where E is the column vector of state FRET efficiencies. The results were in excellent agreement with kinetic traces from the stopped-flow experiments [Figs. 5(b) and 5(c)], indicating that the single-molecule experiment probes the same dynamics observed in bulk experiments. Since the simulated kinetics included all three states, the conclusion was that clearly the minority state has very little impact on the shape of the kinetic traces. This is due to the fact that very little flux goes through this state as the system adjusts to a new equilibrium following a jump in solution conditions.
D. Proposed structure for the intermediate state
Based on the FRET efficiency of the intermediate state, its structure should involve a donor-acceptor distance that is smaller than in the unfolded state but larger than in the folded state. As noted in the Introduction, PL has a classic type I turn in the first β-hairpin, but conformational strain exists in the second β-hairpin due to consecutive positive backbone φ-angles. We hypothesized that in the presence of the denaturant, this strain may cause occasional unfolding of the last two β strands, which can precede the complete unfolding of the protein. O’Neill et_al [11] demonstrated, using size-exclusion chromatography and X-ray crystallography, that a single point mutation in PL’s second β hairpin (G55A) can induce even higher conformational strain, leading to partial unfolding of the hairpin and domain swapping. Moschen and Tollinger [26] used solution NMR spectroscopy to determine the structure of the domain-swapped PL dimer. Under the conditions of our experiments, where individual protein molecules are isolated within vesicles, the domain-swapped protein cannot form. However, it is still possible that the strained β hairpin unfolds, especially in the presence of the denaturant (Fig. 6). Such a partially unfolded state should show a lower FRET efficiency value than the folded state and a higher FRET efficiency value than the unfolded state.
To further test our hypothesis, we prepared the mutant G55A of PL. Single molecule experiments on vesicle-encapsulated double-labeled molecules of this protein were conducted at a GdmCl concentration close to its transition midpoint (1.4M). As with the wild type, transitions that involved an intermediate state with a FRET efficiency of 0.6 were observed. Results from the application of the HMM algorithm to the smFRET trajectories indicated a small increase (from 7% to 10%) in the population of the intermediate state. Although a larger increase in the intermediate state population was expected based on earlier work, this result does provide some support to our hypothesis. We therefore cautiously suggest that the intermediate state involves a partially unfolded structure of the second β hairpin of the protein.
E. Eliminating potential photophysical artifacts
To further explore the source of the intermediate state, several control experiments were performed. In particular, we wanted to rule out the possibility that the minor intermediate is due to photophysical artifacts.
Eaton and co-workers identified red-shifted emission from some protein molecules labeled with the same donor dye used here, Alexa 488 [27]. The red-shifted species of the dye, which was termed A488^{R}, led to significant changes in the FRET efficiency that did not arise from any conformational transition. To observe whether such spectral shifts might be responsible for some of the intermediate FRET efficiency data stretches in single-molecule trajectories, we performed the following experiment. Fluorescence trajectories of protein molecules labeled with the donor dye at position 65 were collected under native and denatured conditions. The single-molecule spectrometer was modified so as to split the donor dye emission into two detection channels; the blue part of the fluorescence spectrum was sent into one detector and the red part of the spectrum into the other. The intensities of the signals of the two detectors were continuously monitored. A shift of the spectrum of the dye was expected to register as an anti-correlated intensity jump in the two detectors. In less than 0.5% of the trajectories an intensity change was registered that was large enough to be considered as caused by A488 (Fig. S4 of the supplementary material). We also directly excited the acceptor dye in double-labeled protein molecules and could not find a significant number of events that could be classified as spectral shifts. We therefore concluded that dye species with spectrally shifted emission could not be the reason for the observation of intermediate FRET efficiency levels.
To reject the possibility that the observed intermediate FRET efficiency level is due to a photophysical effect related to laser illumination, we conducted the experiment under different laser intensities and exposure times. As mentioned earlier, the intermediate FRET efficiency level was observed even at low laser intensity and under the short exposure times entailed by our intermittent illumination scheme. Furthermore, the intermediate FRET efficiency level was present also in single-molecule trajectories measured at 37 °C, rather than the room temperature used in all other experiments.
Finally, to reject any additional possible artifacts of the measurement or the analysis, single-molecule measurements were carried out on fully denatured PL molecules, using a GdmCl concentration of 4.4M. Under such conditions, only the unfolded state should be populated, and therefore the number of observed transitions from/to the unfolded state should be negligible. To identify transitions in the data, we applied the HMM analysis with a two-state model, followed by application of the Viterbi algorithm. Trajectories measured in this denaturant concentration did show some population of an intermediate FRET efficiency level. Indeed, we found that 10% of the trajectories showed evidence of transitions to or from this level. However, this number should be compared to the equivalent value obtained at the folding transition midpoint (2.5M GdmCl), 26%.
Based on all of the above, we can conclude that the vast majority of intermediate FRET efficiency data stretches are due to the bona fide population of a metastable intermediate state and unlikely to result from any photophysical artefacts such as the appearance of the A488^{R} species or others.
III. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we probed the folding dynamics of the well-studied PL. In particular, smFRET experiments coupled with state-of-the-art maximum likelihood estimation methodology were applied to probe individual PL molecules that were immobilized by vesicle encapsulation. While the two-state behavior of PL was affirmed to a large extent, a relatively rare third state was detected, and it was found to be populated 7% of the time and to be connected to both folded and unfolded states of the molecule. This state was missed in multiple ensemble studies due to its fleeting nature. We suggested a possible structure for the intermediate that involves transient unfolding of the second β hairpin of PL, driven by its intrinsic conformational strain.
This study demonstrates the ability of single-molecule FRET spectroscopy to provide a comprehensive description of the dynamics of proteins together with its ability to detect and characterize rare metastable states, hidden in the ensemble. In the last decade, there has been a dramatic development in the single-molecule biophysics field, both in terms of the sophistication of experiments and in terms of the complexity of data analysis [9,10,28–31]. Well-developed tools now exist that allow characterizing the conformational landscape and dynamics of biological macromolecules [32–34]. Our experiments benefited from many of these tools. We expect that the application of analogous experiments will allow us to challenge established notions in the protein folding field and will help in reshaping our understanding of the principles that govern folding, both in the case of simple proteins like PL and in the case of more complex ones.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
FIG. 1. 
Single-molecule experiments on immobilized molecules. (a) Individual PL molecules, double-labeled for FRET with Alexa 647 (violet) and Alexa 488 (green), were encapsulated in vesicles, which were tethered to a glass-supported lipid bilayer using biotin-streptavidin chemistry. The protein molecule is not drawn to scale with the vesicle, which is 100 nm in size. The protein’s first and second β-hairpin motifs are colored red and yellow, respectively. (b) FRET efficiency histogram from an experiment conducted on immobilized molecules at the folding transition midpoint (2.5M GdmCl). A good separation was detected between the folded peak at a FRET efficiency of 0.92 and the unfolded peak at a FRET efficiency of 0.45.
FIG. 2. 
Trajectories of individual molecules show transitions between two major states. [(a), (c), and (e)] Donor (olive) and acceptor (red) data, binned in 500 ms bins. [(b), (d), and (f)] Calculated FRET efficiency trajectories. The trajectories show mostly transitions between two states, folded (with a FRET efficiency of ∼0.9) and unfolded (with a FRET efficiency of ∼0.45). The experiment was conducted at a GdmCl concentration matching the folding transition midpoint (2.5M). Purple lines indicate FRET levels extracted from the maximum likelihood analysis introduced in Sec. II B.
FIG. 3. 
Trajectories of immobilized molecules involving the rare intermediate state. [(a), (c), and (e)] Donor (olive) and acceptor (red) data, binned in 500 ms bins. [(b), (d), and (f)] Calculated FRET efficiency trajectories. A rare intermediate state (dashed purple line), which connects to both major states (solid purple line), was found to be populated 7% of the time. The experiment was conducted at 2.5M GdmCl.
FIG. 4. 
Analysis of the smFRET trajectories. (a) Transition map constructed from trajectories measured at 2.5M GdmCl. The map, based on the change-point analysis of the experimental trajectories, shows mainly transitions between the two FRET efficiency values corresponding to the folded and unfolded states. The encircled regions enclose minority transitions involving the intermediate state. (b) Populations of the three states and rate constants for transitions between all pairs of states (given in 10^{−2} s^{−1}), as derived from the HMM analysis. The widths of the arrows and the areas of the solid circles reflect the associated rates and state populations, respectively. The relative errors on the HMM-derived parameters were estimated from three repeats of the experiment to be 8% and 5% for rates and state propensities, respectively. (c) FRET efficiency histograms of the three states, calculated following a HMM-based Viterbi algorithm assignment of the trajectories. The intermediate state (olive) is clearly noticed between the folded (red) and unfolded (blue) states. The histogram of the whole data (black) matches the sum of the three histograms.
FIG. 5. 
HMM analysis of PL trajectories with three states. (a) Folding rates obtained from the HMM analysis (red-yellow squares) are compared to rates measured in stopped-flow kinetic experiments (blue squares). [(b) and (c)] Stopped-flow kinetic curves, measured at 2.5M and 2.7M GdmCl (red), are compared to curves calculated from the HMM parameters (blue).
FIG. 6. 
Suggested structure for the intermediate. We propose that the intermediate state is linked to partial unfolding of the second β hairpin as a result of conformational strain. Color code is the same as in Fig. 1.
