A study on the application of public–private partnership mode in shale gas development industry in China
China has abundant shale gas resource reserves, and shale gas resource development will greatly relieve the imbalance between energy supply and demand. However, in the traditional government-led unilateral energy development model, the high cost of shale gas development makes financing difficult. Therefore, the development of shale gas in a public–private partnership (PPP) mode is worthy of study. Combining the operation mechanism of the PPP mode and the technology, environment, and market demand of shale gas development in China, this paper has analyzed the operation mechanism of the PPP mode in shale gas development in China from several aspects and gives some suggestions from the perspective of the government and the enterprise to develop the idea of the PPP mode for shale gas development.
I. INTRODUCTION
Shale gas, an unconventional natural gas resource that has risen in popularity in recent decades, has been identified as a resource superior to conventional natural gas because of its high methane content and lack of hydrogen sulfide. Since the 1990s, the United States has been developing and utilizing shale gas, significantly changing the pattern of energy exploitation in the United States. Britain, Japan, Canada, and other countries have also developed long-term shale gas development strategies. With international energy and environmental changes, China's energy structure needs to be optimized, and so, the government is actively developing policies to promote the development and utilization of unconventional oil and gas resources [1–3]. China's shale gas reserves are huge: The Ministry of Land and Resources P.R.C preliminary estimate of the shale gas resource potential in China is (25–35) × 10^{12} m^{3}. The U.S. Energy Information Administration's estimate for the geological resources of shale gas in China is 100 × 10^{12} m^{3}, with recoverable resources of 36 × 10^{12} m^{3}, which is much higher than the shale gas reserves in the United States of 24.4 × 10^{12} m^{3} [4]. As of October 2016, China's shale gas proven geological reserves are 544.129 × 10^{9} m^{3}, with 54 national shale gas mining rights, totaling an area of 170 000 km^{2} [5]. The main distribution of shale gas is shown in Fig. 1 [6].
During the 12th Five-Year Plan period, China's shale gas industry went from nonexistent to achieving large-scale commercial development. In 2015, China's shale gas production reached 4.471 × 10^{9} m^{3}, and shale gas production in January–September 2016 was 6.29 × 10^{9} m^{3} [7]. On September 14, 2016, the National Energy Board released the report “Shale Gas Development Plan (2016–2020),” in which it was proposed to develop and exploit perfect mature 3500-m to shallow-sea shale gas, improve the 3500-m to deep-sea shale gas land and sea transition phase shale gas exploration and development technology, and strive to achieve a shale gas production of 30 × 10^{9} m^{3}. The report forecasts the shale gas development industry to 2030 years, when the annual production capacity is expected to further expand to 800–1000 × 10^{9} m^{3} [8]. At this point, shale gas has gradually become an important part of China's unconventional natural gas energy production.
Since 2005, Petro China, Sinopec, the Ministry of Land and Resources, and other units have carried out exploration of geological shallow wells, parameter wells, and earthquakes in Sichuan, Ordos, Qinshui, the Bohai Gulf, and other basins, as well as Zhaotong in Yunnan, Dafang in Guizhou, Jiannan in Hubei, Lianyuan in Hunan, Tongren in Guizhou, Fuling in Chongqing, and other places. They have obtained key parameters for shale gas evaluation and optimized favorable shale gas zones, drilled a number of evaluation wells and pilot test wells for the development of shale gas, and established national shale gas development demonstration areas in Fuling in Chongqing, Changning-Weiyuan Sichuan, and Zhaotong in Yunnan. Exploitation of shale gas in China is gradually maturing, and compared with conventional natural gas projects, shale gas project mining technology requirements are high, mining is difficult, and pre-capital investment has accounted for a high proportion of total investment. However, because development funds for domestic shale gas mainly come from equity financing and debt financing, domestic private enterprises have excessively relied on bank loans and equity financing for funds for a long time. Private enterprises have small scales and low credit levels, which limits the quantity of funds they can obtain from these two financing channels. Their financing ability is far from that of state-owned enterprises. Compared to small and medium-sized enterprises, state-owned enterprises have more diversified financing channels and stronger financing abilities [9]. Therefore, in addition to the four central enterprises (Petro China, Sinopec, CNOOC, and Yanchang Petroleum) and the two state-owned enterprises for CBM development, nineteen relevant listed companies have obtained financing of 15.7 × 10^{9} yuan through the capital market. Equity financing accounts for more than 80% and reaches 12.7 × 10^{9} yuan, while the amount of debt financing is only 2.5 × 10^{9} yuan [10]. In recent years, with the further expansion of shale gas exploitation areas, there has been a sharp increase in required cost. It is increasingly apparent that the original financing model has several disadvantages, including the single investment entity, the lack of flexibility in financing, and the lack of an effective withdrawal mechanism, all of which are key problems that suppress the financing of shale gas. Production of shale gas is a new industry that has professional division of labor requirements and is strongly innovation driven, making it suitable for multicompetitive and division of labor cooperation models. To effectively resolve the funding gap faced by China's shale gas development industry, it is important to break the model of monopoly development and introduction of foreign capital. The urgent problem to be solved is the capital gap faced by China's shale gas development industry, that is to say, how to break the monopoly development model and introduce foreign capital. A public-private partnership (PPP) development project financing mode, for the appropriate project, can reduce government financial pressure, so that the public gets higher quality public works and an effective supply of public services, while growing private capital and private capital can create market development, so that market players in the market system can better take advantage of their creativity.
The healthy development of shale gas projects is inseparable from the special policies formulated by the government; from 2009 to 2015, 106 PPP-related policies were introduced at national and local levels, with an average of 15 policies being introduced each year, of which 87 were introduced in 2014 and 2015, indicating that China is promoting the PPP mode [11]. In “Infrastructure and Public Utilities Franchise Management Measures,” which came into effect on June 1, 2015, the five major sectors of energy, transportation, water conservancy, environmental protection, and municipal engineering were designated as franchise areas [12]. In 2016, the National Energy Board promulgated the “Notice on the Active Promotion of PPP Mode in the Energy Sector,” which pointed out that the promotion of government and private capital cooperation in the field of energy would help to break down unreasonable restrictions on the entry of private capital into energy infrastructure and public services and enable full market allocation. The decisive role of resources is conducive to improving the level of regional energy and public services, so that the people can directly benefit from energy reform and development. The corresponding policy safeguards are as follows: to simplify the approval of PPP projects, to promote energy price reform, to strengthen financial cooperation, and to provide timely third-party assessment [13]. However, the PPP mode is not suitable for all projects, and improper use will result in incalculable losses, such as that of one of the greatest infrastructure construction projects of the 20th century, the English Channel Tunnel, which had a planned cost of £4.8 × 10^{9} and an final actual cost for the first half of the full operation of the loss of £774 × 10^{6} [14]. Therefore, to better apply the PPP mode to China's shale gas development services, a study on application of the PPP mode for shale gas development is essential.
At present, there are few studies on the operation mechanism of applying the PPP mode to specific projects. He has suggested that the government should establish a model of an incentive mechanism to maximize the social welfare and boost the enthusiasm of private enterprise participation, so as to attract private capital [15]. PPP is the way to speed up the process of urbanization, change government functions, improve national governance, and build a modern financial system. Y. Chen has built a theoretical bargaining game model and conducted questionnaires and in-depth interviews with PPP decision-makers, local government officials, state owned business operators, and financial institutions, in order to find some ideas and suggestions for practical operation mechanisms [16]. The PPP mode is considered to be an important measure to promote the steady and rapid development of infrastructure. However, for the PPP mode, how to protect the legitimate rights and interests of private capital is very important. Against this background, Li has discussed how to build private capital's interest protection mechanism in PPP. It should build the private capital return mechanism, operation mechanism, and revenue from entry mechanism [17]. Using the PPP mode applied to China's port construction, it was concluded that the PPP mode can effectively solve the problem of tax structure, financing, law, and operation [18]. An analysis of the path of private capital entering China's shale gas industry has been conducted [19]. It has also been argued that applying public–private partnerships to urban wastewater treatment projects will increase financing capacity, improve management effectiveness, improve operational efficiency, and reduce the local debt risk [20]. In a collection of U.S. public transport information, seven selected VFM (Value for Money) indicators were used to evaluate the value of the U.S. highway project evaluation [21]. The above research is mainly based on the assumption that the PPP mode is applicable to the project, and it analyzes the advantages of the application of the PPP mode but does not offer a specific operation mechanism for the PPP mode applied in shale gas development. Therefore, to solve the problem of whether a shale gas project is proper for the PPP mode, we need to analyze the operation mechanism of the PPP mode in shale gas development in China. Some suggestions from the perspective of the government and the enterprise to develop the idea of the PPP mode for shale gas development are needed.
II. OPERATION MECHANISM OF THE PPP MODE IN SHALE GAS DEVELOPMENT
In order to successfully introduce the PPP mode in the shale gas development project, the government not only needs to have good operational capacity but also needs to establish a specific and effective PPP operation mechanism to guide, supervise, and coordinate the participation of all parties to work, to ensure that the parties involved in the reasonable implementation of their rights and obligations, and to effectively promote the smooth operation of PPP projects.
From the perspective of international practice, some mechanisms are directly related to the success or failure of the PPP project, including organizational security mechanism, value evaluation mechanism, risk sharing mechanism, pricing and compensation mechanism, performance guarantee mechanism, and contract management mechanism [22,23].
A. Participants of shale gas development in the PPP mode
Using the PPP mode for shale gas development, the government needs to divide the mining rights of conventional natural gas and shale gas, break up the monopoly of mining rights in shale gas blocks, and cooperate with the private enterprises with shale gas development technology and qualification through open market bidding. The participants of shale gas development in the PPP mode mainly include government, private enterprise, special purpose vehicle (SPV), bank or other financial institutions, insurance company, trustee, the operator of storage and transportation infrastructure, professional equipment suppliers, users, etc.
1. Government
The government of the project-host country plays a key role in the PPP mode. These effects are mainly manifested in both micro- and macro-aspects [24]. On the microside, the government can provide franchise rights, such as shale gas mining rights, and land and good infrastructure for the project development. Some local governments can even provide long-term energy supply conditions, preferential export credits, and other types of loans or loan guarantees to reduce the construction risk and operational risk of the project. At the macrolevel, the government can provide preferential treatment for project financing through formulating relevant tax policies and foreign exchange policies, so as to create a favorable investment environment for project construction.
2. Private enterprise
Before the open tendering for shale gas mining rights, the investment subjects of shale gas development in China were mainly large state-owned oil and gas companies. Sinopec (Sinopec Group) accounted for 54.78% of the total investment, CNPC (China National Petroleum Corporation) accounted for 29.57% of the total investment, and the proportion of two enterprises was up to 84.35%. Therefore, the state-owned enterprises are still the main forces for the development and investment of shale gas in China [25]. Using the PPP mode for shale gas development, it should solve the problem that the investment subjects are not varied and attract more private enterprises to participate in shale gas development through market competition. At present, the Chinese government strongly supports private capital into the field of oil and gas exploration and development. During the second open tendering for shale gas mining rights in 2012, the Ministry of Land and Resources canceled the restrictions on the ownership of bidding enterprises and received 51 qualified tender documents from private enterprises, accounting for a third of the total, and eventually, two private enterprises won the bid [25].
In international cooperation, CNPC has teamed up with Shell, ConocoPhillips, Hess, and other international well-known oil companies to prospect shale gas, and a PSC (Product Sharing Contract) for the exploration had been signed. Taking the Sichuan Basin as an example, the Fushun-Yongchuan cooperative block is the block that CNPC and Shell cooperate to develop shale gas. Since 2009, CNPC and Shell have jointly carried out the evaluation of shale gas resources. By 2014, 17 wells have been put into operation, and the production of 11 wells has been produced by 0.9 × 10^{8} m^{3} [26].
Therefore, the main investment subjects of shale gas development in the PPP mode include large state-owned oil and gas enterprises, private enterprises, and foreign oil and gas companies. In order to reduce the investment pressure and risk, the above three investment subjects can combine with each other to form a multi-subject cooperative investment based on the principle of their own enterprise situation and advantages.
3. Special purpose vehicle
The financing arrangement of PPP projects is mainly based on the expected benefits, assets of the project, and support measures from the government. The amount of loans, the cost of financing, and the design of the financing structure are directly related to the project cash flow and the asset value of the project itself. Therefore, the financing of PPP projects is a project-based financing activity. The cooperation between the private enterprise and the public sector of the government can set up a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to realize the limited recourse or non-recourse of loan banks to project sponsors, which can play a role of risk segregation to a certain extent.
4. Banks or other financial institutions, trustees, and insurance companies
Shale gas development requires a general amount of capital. According to the summary data of the investment of shale gas development enterprises in China which was collected by the Ministry of Land and Resources of China, as of 2017, four state-owned enterprises engaged in shale gas development: Sinopec, CNPC, Yanchang Petroleum Group, CNOOC (China National Offshore Oil Corp.), and two coal mining enterprises, CUCMC (China United Coalbed Methane Corporation) and Henan Meichenqi Development Utilization Corporation have spent a cumulative investment of about 20.66 × 10^{9} US dollars [25].
It is not realistic that such a large amount of investment is invested only by the own capital of enterprises. Thus, most of the fund for shale gas development projects comes from banks and other financial institutions. Loan Banks mainly rely on the SPV's assets and future earnings as the guarantee of repayment.
In order to prevent the SPV from defaulting or transferring assets, the loan bank can ask the SPV to put assets and earning accounts in a neutral institution outside the host country, namely, trustee. The trustee is generally a bank of higher creditworthiness or an independent trust company [24]. In addition, insurance companies can provide insurance services for the unforeseeable risks of the project.
5. Operators of storage and transportation infrastructures, professional equipment suppliers, and users
The storage and transportation infrastructures include long-distance oil and gas pipelines, natural gas municipal pipelines, storage, and LNG receiving stations. At present, the long-distance oil and gas pipelines in China are mainly built and operated by CNPC and Sinopec. The branch natural gas municipal pipelines are mainly invested and operated by the gas companies that have the franchise rights granted by the local government.
Most of the LNG receiving stations are invested and operated by three big oil companies, and minorities are invested and operated by some private enterprises. The commercial storages of the storage facilities are operated by the private enterprises with independent decisions. The national storages are mainly built and commissioned by state-owned oil enterprises, such as Sinopec and CNPC [19]. It can be seen that the vast majority of China's storage and transportation infrastructure resources are controlled and operated by the three major oil companies. Other private enterprises can sign the usage right contracts with operators if they need to use these storage and transportation infrastructures.
During the process of exploration and development of shale gas, professional technology and equipment need to be adopted. The powerful private enterprises can directly purchase professional and technical equipment for the exploration and development of shale gas projects. In order to reduce investment pressure and shorten the return cycle, the SPV can obtain the right to use professional technical equipment by signing equipment leasing contracts with professional equipment suppliers.
Users of the product play a very important role in project financing, which constitutes a key part of financing credit guarantee. The SPV guarantees the market and cash flow of the shale gas project by signing long-term shale-gas supply contracts with the product's users, providing an important credit guarantee for the loan of the project.
Therefore, the PPP mode provides a unique opportunity to solve the funding gap problem of shale gas development in China. The participants of shale gas development in the PPP mode are shown in Fig. 2.
B. Risk allocation mechanism between the government and private enterprise
1. Principles of risk allocation
The principles of risk allocation are as follows:
(1) The risk-bearer should be able to control the risk.
(2) The risk-bearer can transfer the risk reasonably.
(3) The risk-bearer has greater economic interest or motivation to control the risk.
(4) It is most effective to take the risk for the risk-bearer.
(5) If the risk occurs ultimately, the risk-bearer should not transfer the resulting costs and losses to the other party.
2. Basic framework of risk identification and distribution
According to the principles of risk allocation optimization and risk income equivalence, considering the factors such as risk management ability of the government, project return mechanism, and risk management ability of the market, it is necessary to allocate project risks reasonably between the government and the private enterprise.
a. Project risks
① Shale gas exploration risk: Shale gas is a new field of exploration, and geologists have not formed a systematic understanding of the law for enrichment and accumulation of shale gas. According to the data [27], the evolution degree of organic matter of favorable areas of shale gas in China is in the high-over mature stage, while the evolution degree of organic matter of shale gas in the U.S. is lower than the high mature stage. As the maturity increases, the less the adsorption capacity of shale minerals and organic matter to natural gas is the less the content of the adsorbed gas will be. The favorable areas of shale gas in southern China are in hilly and low-mountain areas, where surface conditions are much more complex than in the United States. The buried depth of shale reservoirs in the Devonian and Mississippi of the United States is in the range of 1000 m to 3500 m. However, in China, the shale gas reservoirs whose buried depth is less than 3000 m are relatively few, whereas the buried depths of some shale reservoirs are more than 5000 m. Although many agencies have estimated and predicted the potential of shale gas resources in China based on the shale gas resource amount of the United States, most of the comparative parameters are basically static parameters with limited basic data, which lack support from practical data. Therefore, the shale gas resource amount in China is not clear at present. If the shale layer is not suitable for the horizontal well fracturing or the shale gas resources are not high, it will lead to high investment, low output, huge investment risk, low return, and even more serious, which may result in serious waste of social resources. Fu Chengyu, Chairman of Sinopec, said that the upstream exploration and development of oil and gas is a high risk industry, and the international oil exploration has a success rate of only 30% [28]. Therefore, the deeper buried shale gas exploration is a high risk industry, and its investment risk is huge.
In view of the high risk of upstream exploration of oil and natural gas, the traditional oil and natural gas enterprises usually adopt the integrated management systems such as upstream and downstream integration, production, and marketing integration, which can fill the upstream exploration investment with oil and gas production profit, so as to reduce the operation risk [29]. However, for newly established companies, it is difficult to achieve the integration of business in the short term and turn the natural gas reserves rapidly into profits to offset the risk of upstream exploration. In this case, once the exploration situation is not ideal, it is very difficult for newly established companies to survive. It is also the reason why most companies that have the shale gas mining rights now are holding back and lack enthusiasm for investment.
If the exploration risk is allocated to the private enterprise, the enthusiasm of private capital to participate in shale gas projects will be affected. Therefore, the exploration risk should be shared by the government and the private enterprise. The “Shale Gas Industry Policy” explicitly pointed out that the compensation and royalty of mineral resources for the shale gas enterprises should be reduced or removed, and the tax incentives of resource tax, value-added tax, and income tax should be issued. With respect to the exploration fees, royalties, and resource compensation fees that charged from companies which have successfully explored shale gas and commercialized development of shale gas, the government should form a special fund to manage it. When the exploration areas are found to be free of shale gas, the exploration royalty should be deducted, and the special fund will be used to subsidize the partial cost of the exploration. Once the exploration is not ideal, the government should make appropriate policies to solve the problem of continuous operation for enterprises that have not yet established an integrated business mode.
② Shale gas exploitation risk: Shale gas is buried deeper than conventional natural gas, and the exploration techniques of shale gas are more complex and require more investment. The investment of a single shale gas horizontal well in China is about 80 × 10^{6} yuan. Thus, the cost of extracting shale gas in China could reach 2.8 yuan/m^{3} [30]. At present, the conventional natural gas production price in China is between 1.0 and 1.5 yuan/m^{3} [31]. Therefore, the development of shale gas is much more expensive than conventional natural gas. According to the development experience in the United States, the production of shale gas wells has been reduced rapidly. The production has decreased to 65%∼80% in the first year and 35%∼45% in the second year [28]. To ensure sustained and stable production, shale gas development companies have to invest continuously and continue intensive drilling. Therefore, the mastery degree of the geological structure of shale gas blocks and the applicability of drilling technology directly determine the success or failure of the project [10]. The large-scale production of shale gas requires the skillful drilling and development technology and project management capabilities of private enterprises. The development of the project is wholly owned by the SPV. The SPV can effectively control and defuse the project exploitation risk through scientific and reasonable management. Thus, the project exploitation risk should be fully assumed by the private enterprise.
b. Financial risk
The financial risk is mainly manifested in interest rate risk and exchange rate risk. Most of the funding for shale gas development comes from bank loans, and the volatility of interest rates would increase the financing costs of the project. When introducing foreign capital and technology, the fluctuation of the exchange rate will increase the financing cost of the project and reduce the profitability of the project. Financing is a cooperative relationship between private enterprises and investors, and the private enterprises have full responsibility for financing. Thus, the financial risk should be entirely in the hands of the private enterprises. Private enterprises may adopt alternative equity capital or alternative loan schemes or introduce specific investors to mitigate and transfer the financial risk.
c. Fiscal and tax policy risk
The initial investment of shale gas development is large, and the investment recovery period is long. The government's tax incentives for shale gas will directly affect the project's financial viability [9]. Tax risk is a policy risk. Compared with private enterprises, the government is more capable of resolving the tax policy. Therefore, the government should bear the risk of the tax policy. For this kind of risk, the government should actively coordinate with the tax department to form a preferential tax policy suitable for shale gas development as soon as possible so as to reduce the risk of project tax.
d. Withdrawal risk
The withdrawal risk mainly refers to the risk that the government has the right to ask for the private enterprise's withdrawal when the private enterprise is unable to continue to promote shale gas development. The private enterprise has the obligation to ensure the orderly implementation of the project, and so, the private enterprise must take full responsibility for its own withdrawal. When the private enterprise withdraws during the development of shale gas, the government can reauthorize other enterprises to continue the development of the project. After the liquidation of assets that have been explored or developed, some related expenses can be paid by the subsequent development enterprise to the private enterprise that has been withdrawn. For this kind of risk, the private enterprise should be well managed to avoid the withdrawal risk. Meanwhile, the government and enterprises should jointly negotiate and formulate the effective withdrawal compensation mechanism to rationally allocate the economic losses of private enterprises when the risk occurs.
e. Political risk
Many political risks are caused by the government itself, which are difficult for private enterprises to control. Therefore, political risk should be borne by the government according to the principle of risk sharing. The treatment of government credit risk should be clearly listed in the contract agreement. A credible third party can provide a specific project guarantee to minimize the losses caused by the government's credit risk.
f. Legal and regulatory risk
The imperfect law and regulatory system and the risk of legal change are usually undertaken by the government because the government is more capable of controlling this risk and taking the risk. In order to reduce the legal risk of the project, the government needs perfect relevant laws and regulations as soon as possible and chooses partners who have good credit status. The government's breach of contract needs to be clearly listed in the related agreements.
g. Market risk
For private enterprises that have already developed the shale gas on a large scale, the commercial gas production has been able to generate a certain amount of cash flow, and the resource condition is also more clearly secured, and thus, it is easier to obtain financial support. In this case, the problem of enterprise operation sustainability may be mainly due to the market price of natural gas [32]. The government should determine the fiscal subsidies based on the extraction cost of shale gas and market price differences. The duration of the subsidy policy should be determined according to the development of technology. With the development and maturity of shale gas development technology, if the private enterprise can achieve profits through reasonable operation, the subsidy policy should be abolished. Therefore, the market risk can be shared by both the government and the private enterprise.
h. Contract risk
The contract risk mainly refers to the risk caused by unreasonable allocation of responsibilities, rights, and interests in the process of exploration and development of shale gas projects. According to the principle of risk allocation, the contract risk should be shared by both parties.
i. Force majeure risk
The natural disaster risk of force majeure risk is a transferable risk. The private enterprise can transfer part of the risk cost by purchasing commercial insurance. The remaining retained risk should be taken by the private enterprise. Other unforeseen risks such as earthquakes, catastrophic floods, wars, and other force majeure risks are jointly borne by private enterprises and the government.
3. Results of risk allocation in PPP shale gas projects
According to the above risk allocation framework, the results of risk allocation between the public sector and the private sector are shown in Table I.
C. Government fiscal incentive policy
The shale gas industry in China has achieved gratifying achievements in recent years, whereas there is still a wide gap between China and the advanced countries such as the United States which uses shale gas efficiently. The United States has many successful experiences in the development and utilization of shale gas. With exception to the advanced exploration techniques and scientific management methods, it is especially worthwhile to study the systematic fiscal incentive policy and thorough a tax and fee system. The fiscal incentive policy is a preferential and encouraging policy formulated by the government on finances, taxes, and fees, which is intended to encourage the healthy and rapid development of specific industries. The fiscal incentive policy includes fiscal subsidy, tax relief, low tax rate, and export tax rebate policy. A tendentious government procurement policy is also a financial incentive [33].
Tight gas, coal-bed methane, and shale gas are unconventional gases in the United States. The federal government has supported unconventional gas development by implementing fiscal incentives. At present, the development of shale gas is the most successful [34]. Shale gas production related taxes and the fees policy mainly adopt oil and gas related laws and regulations. For example, the “Natural Gas Policy Act” was first formulated in 1978. Although it mentioned the support for shale gas development and utilization, it did not specify the amount and the fixed number of years of the shale gas subsidy. By 1980, the “Crude Oil Windfall Tax Law” granted unconventional gas a subsidy of equivalent $3 per barrel of oil, and the valid subsidy objects include the coal-bed methane and shale gas. The schedule of the subsidy was valid from 1980 and has been extended until 1992 [35]. This policy has led to a rapid increase in the number of unconventional gas wells, accounting for 78% of the total number of new gas mines [36], and therefore, the incentive effect for unconventional gas well drilling is very effective.
In the 1992 revision of the “Crude Oil Windfall Tax Law,” a new tax relief policy was introduced. The content of the new tax relief policy is the shale gas which was produced before 2003 by the gas wells that were drilled between 1979 and 1999, and its tax was reduced by $0.02 per cubic meter. At a time when the gas price in the United States was only about $0.07/m^{3}, the tax reduction is nearly up to 30% of the sale price. Then, “Taxpayer Relief Act” was enacted in 1997 to continue the tax relief policy for shale gas until 2006. When the shale gas industry in the United States has entered the fast lane and continued to enjoy the high subsidies, the fiscal incentive policy has given a generous subsidy of equivalent $22.05/ton of oil to the shale gas from 2006 to 2010. In 2005, the U.S. government stepped up the policy support for natural gas that was hard to exploit, and this policy support lowered the drilling tax for shale gas. The U.S. government has also increased the commission by 25% on the landowners of shale gas, which has raised the incentive for landowners and exploration companies to sign land leases [37].
Based on the above tax incentives and financial subsidies, the U.S. shale gas development enterprises have greatly reduced the development cost. The U.S. fiscal incentive policy for shale gas development has been implemented for 23 years, which has greatly enhanced investors' enthusiasm for shale gas. In addition, the number of unconventional gas wells in the United States has risen sharply, leading to a huge increase in U.S. shale gas production.
After all, the development of shale gas in China has not been long. There are not many incentive policies. Some policies continue to consult previous documents related to the development of oil and gas resources. Before 2015, the fiscal incentive policies formulated in China to support the development of shale gas were mainly embodied in three documents [36]. First, the “Shale Gas Development Plan (2011–2015),” issued in 2012, gave the first guidance on the development of China's shale gas industry and made plans for the target and major work of the shale gas industry during the 12th five-year plan period. Second, “The Notice of the Ministry of Finance and the National Energy Administration on the Introduction of Subsidies for Shale Gas Development and Utilization” (hereinafter referred to as “The Notice”), issued in 2012, mainly came from the various subsidies, tax breaks, and tax deduction policies of China's shale gas industry. Third, the “Shale Gas Industry Policy,” released in 2013, has increased the position of the shale gas industry in China, and it has incorporated the shale gas industry into the country's strategic emerging industries for the first time and has asked for more financial support to improve the velocity of shale gas exploration and development in China.
In the early stage, the most important fiscal incentive policy for shale gas in China is the subsidy of 0.4 yuan per cubic meter. There are also some policies on tax breaks and tax incentives, but the intensity of these policies is relatively small, and its role is relatively small. Exploration and development enterprises can reduce the royalties of shale gas exploration rights and mining rights according to the law and apply for the reduction or exemption of mineral resource compensation fees and mining royalties. There are also some preferential policies for resource tax, value-added tax, and income tax. In addition, the “Shale Gas Industry Policy” has put forward the market pricing of shale gas and has discussed the possibility of implementing the policy of resource depletion allowance for shale gas development enterprises. These policies have provided some support for the early development of the shale gas industry in China. However, the overall subsidy rate of fiscal incentive policies is limited, and so, the shale gas pricing mechanism is still not marketized; meanwhile, the pipeline problems of shale gas cannot be improved greatly in the short term. The vigorous competition pattern is not fully formed, and the efforts to attract more enterprises to develop shale gas need to continue.
In the PPP mode, the main reason why the public sector and the private enterprise can cooperate and form a partnership is that they share a common goal. The goal of the private enterprise is to realize the pursuit of economic interests, while the public sector is the pursuit of social public welfare and social benefits. Therefore, in order to stimulate the development of the shale gas industry and attract more private capital to participate in shale gas development in the PPP mode, the government should improve the fiscal incentive policies, increase subsidies, and increase the tax incentives of the shale gas industry.
Financial subsidy is the most important means of the fiscal incentive policy for shale gas, which has a strong impetus to the development of the shale gas industry. In order to further attract private capital investment in the shale gas industry and expand the scale mining of shale gas, the financial subsidy should be enhanced. The threshold for shale gas subsidies should be lowered. As mentioned above, China's shale gas subsidy policy is harsh. There is a high threshold for subsidized shale gas. It is not easy for enterprises to develop shale gas projects to meet the requirements of subsidies. The current subsidy policy is basically only available to the three major oil and gas companies, which is very bad to attract the private enterprises with weaker power. In addition, the subsidies should be increased. From 2013 to 2015 when the shale gas extraction scale is not big during the three years, the shale gas production enterprises can get a subsidy of 0.4 yuan per cubic meter, which was less than 30% of the gas price and much lower than the U.S. shale gas subsidy. Since 2016, the subsidy has been further reduced to 0.3 yuan per cubic meter. Therefore, the government can consider setting up new subsidy projects to make the total subsidy amount to 0.7 yuan per cubic meter. In this way, the ratio of the financial subsidy can reach 50% of the selling price of gas, which is close to the subsidy level of the United States. This is also consistent with the environmental value of natural gas. After calculation, the environmental value of natural gas instead of coal is 0.7 yuan per cubic meter. Furthermore, it should extend the subsidy years and stabilize the subsidy policy and do not reduce the subsidy standard in a short time. Shale gas enterprises need long-term and stable support policies in the early stage of development. The U.S. shale gas industry enjoyed nearly 30 years of support from the fiscal incentive policies, while the shale gas industry in China had only recently reduced its subsidies from 0.4 yuan/m^{3} to 0.3 yuan/m^{3} in 4 years. The industry experts have mostly worried about the rapid growth of shale gas. Therefore, the Chinese government should formulate a standard and reasonable fiscal incentive policy for shale gas to reduce the conditions of subsidies, extend the period of subsidies, and improve the confidence of enterprises in the development of shale gas.
The amount of financial subsidies should be determined based on the cost and price of natural gas, and the duration of the subsidies should be determined based on the development of shale gas technology. With the development of the technology of the shale gas industry, the shale gas enterprises can make a profit on its own, and the financial subsidies should be canceled. At present, the shale gas subsidy policy in China is subsidized by unit production, and the subsidy standard is the same for all shale gas projects. When the shale gas industry develops to a certain stage and has the scale of commercial development, the government should consider the difficulty degree of shale gas exploitation, the technological innovation capability of enterprises, and the effect of environmental protection to carry on the graded financial subsidy [32].
In the PPP mode, when signing contracts, the government and the private enterprise should set up a bearing interval for the price fluctuation of the shale gas market based on market pricing. The lower limit of interval can be formulated according to the development cost of shale gas. Considering the main factors that affect the price of the shale gas market, the reasonable upper limit of the interval can be formulated based on the conventional gas price level. The main impact factors of the market price of shale gas include the international natural gas market price, RMB exchange rate, domestic inflation rate, total gas output, total demand of natural gas, labor cost, etc [10]. Once the price fluctuation of the shale gas market exceeds the lower limit of the affordable interval, in other words, when the sale revenue of shale gas is lower than the development cost, the government will give some financial subsidies to the project to ensure the investment income of the project. When the price fluctuation of the shale gas market exceeds the upper limit of the affordable interval, the government will adjust the profit of private enterprises through the tax policy to avoid excessive speculation in the shale gas market. For the specific price fluctuation interval and the formulation of subsidy policies, the progressive subsidy policy can be adopted to implement different levels of subsidies for different price intervals [10].
D. Performance appraisal
After the implementation of the PPP mode, the performance appraisal of PPP projects is to use the evaluation and feedback mechanism to determine whether the effectiveness and efficiency of project improvement and determine the degree of realization of the project performance and the expected goals, so as to provide scientific basis for improving the efficiency of the project [38].
As mentioned above, there are many participants involved in the development of shale gas in the PPP mode. After the completion of the project, the participants focused on the performance level of their own projects in the project performance appraisal and seldom considered the performance impact factors of other participants. The PPP project is designed to meet the public demand for public goods. Thus, the performance appraisal of the shale gas PPP project should not only evaluate its economic benefits but also evaluate its social benefits and so on. Under the premise of multi-objective evaluation, it is difficult for a single index to evaluate the project comprehensively, and thus, a set of perfect performance appraisal systems is needed. This paper has constructed a performance appraisal system of the PPP shale gas project from the four dimensions, such as project completion degree, social benefits, economic benefits, and sustainability, which has a full assessment of the shale gas development process from project management, production technology, environment, economy, society, etc. The performance appraisal system of the shale gas development project in the PPP mode is shown in Table II.
The implementation process of PPP project performance appraisal includes four stages: making evaluation criteria, data collection, evaluation, and improvement inspection. A scientific and reasonable performance appraisal system should be developed. According to effective communication, the data related to PPP performance appraisal should be collected and the appropriate methods should be selected to calculate the overall performance level of PPP projects. In addition, it should analyze the comprehensive performance level of the PPP project, find out the link of the improvement of project performance, make reasonable improvement plan and monitor the implementation of the project, and promote the improvement of the comprehensive performance level of the project. Furthermore, the government should specify the responsible institutions and personnel of the various links of the PPP project and formulate relevant management procedures as the guidance basis to evaluate the assessment and audit results. Then, the government should establish and improve the accountability system to promote the improvement of investment efficiency of government departments [39].
E. Market access mechanism
The shale gas industry consists of upstream exploration and mining, midstream transport, and downstream distribution. At present, state-owned enterprises in China not only monopolize the upstream shale gas mining right but also control the main pipeline network and LNG receiving station. Although the downstream natural gas sale link is open competition, allowing private capital to enter, state-owned enterprises can control the raw material supply of downstream enterprises through the monopoly of mining rights and transfer the upstream monopoly advantages to the downstream [40].
When two or more kinds of minerals in the same mining area have achieved their individual grade, reserve requirement, and mineral deposit size and belong to the independent mines that need separate mining rights in China, two or more mining rights will coexist in one mining area to create a conflict of rights. The occurrence of overlapping mining rights is based on the common existence of symbiotic mineral phenomena. According to the data released by the ministry of land and resources, China has 180 favorable mining areas of shale gas resources, with a total of 1.1 × 10^{6} m^{2}. However, 760 000 m^{2} overlap with conventional oil and gas resources, which accounts for about 70% of the total area. The mining rights of overlapping mining areas are all registered by two state-owned enterprises, CNPC and Sinopec [10]. The overlapping of mining rights was considered as a major obstacle to the development of shale gas industry.
In order to deal with the overlapping mining right conflict and promote the exploration and development of shale gas, according to the “Notice of the Ministry of land and resources on strengthening the supervision and administration of shale gas resources exploration and exploitation” (2012), when the shale gas mining right overlapped with the traditional oil and gas mining right, the shale gas exploration right was given priority to the subject of the traditional oil and gas mining right.
Due to the fact that more than 70% of shale gas blocks overlap with traditional natural gas mining rights, the shale gas blocks that have already been carried out in two rounds of prospecting bids are the remaining blank blocks [41]. However, the high quality blocks of shale gas are essentially overlapping blocks with traditional mining rights, and the lack of abundant gas reservoirs in the blank blocks will affect the enthusiasm of other private enterprises to participate in the bidding of shale gas exploration rights. In the PPP mode, the government should treat all private enterprises equally in the prospecting and bidding transfer process to attract private capital to participate in shale gas development. In the overlapping blocks, if the main body of the shale gas exploration right is different from that of the traditional oil and gas mining right, the actual conflict of the right to exercise will be generated. In addition, how to coordinate and solve the problem can be solved by the two parties through the market channel.
A key factor in the successful commercialization of shale gas development in the United States is the opening of the developed natural gas pipeline network and the whole network of pipe networks.
The branch line of the U.S. gas pipeline network reaches 49 000 km, and the annual capacity of the pipeline network reaches 500 × 10^{9} m^{3}. However, the main line length of China's natural gas pipeline network is only 45 000 km, and the annual capacity of the pipeline network is 80 ×10^{9} m^{3} [10].
To promote the commercialization of shale gas development, China needs to realize the opening of the natural gas pipeline to third parties as soon as possible to improve the investment efficiency of private enterprises and attract more private capital into shale gas development. In 2014, the national energy administration issued a regulation on the fair and open supervision of oil and gas pipeline network facilities and put forward the policy of treating China's oil and gas pipeline facilities equally to improve the efficiency of China's pipeline network. On December 7, 2016, China Petroleum Gas Pipeline co., Ltd., signed a framework agreement with Xinjiang Guanghui New Energy Co., Ltd., and the former will open the gas pipeline to the Jiangsu Qidong LNG distribution station [42]. It is the first time that CNPC's oil and gas pipeline has been opened to private enterprises, and it is good news for private enterprises to participate in shale gas development. It is estimated that more private enterprises will sign a transshipment agreement with CNPC and Sinopec in order to further promote the reform of the natural gas market.
Therefore, in the PPP mode, based on the partnership between the government and the private sector to achieve common goals, the government should open up the upstream of natural gas in an orderly manner, implement the third-party fair access of infrastructure facilities, and establish a multi-level natural gas market system. To do this, the government should break the monopoly of mining rights, solve the overlapping problem of mining rights, reform the use system of the natural gas pipeline network vigorously, and improve the development degree of the pipeline network for private enterprises. In addition, the government should clarify the market access conditions of the PPP mode and make it open and transparent. In the process of bidding, the government should relax restrictions as far as possible in accordance with the principles of fairness and justice, which helps to achieve the goal of investment diversification.
F. Supervision mechanism
The government should establish a perfect supervision mechanism for the PPP mode to realize the whole process of the shale gas development project. In the shale gas mining right allocation and shale gas exploration and mining process, the government should transform the role of resource management into the role of market regulation and clarify the responsibilities of supervision. The main aspects are as follows [40].
First, the government should specify the qualifications of the enterprises participating in the allocation of mining rights in detail. The factors to be considered contain not only the registered capital, exploration qualification, and independent status of the legal person but also the qualification of safety production and prevention of environmental risks. The government should crack down on illegal resource exploitation which does not meet the qualification requirements.
Second, the winning bidder of the mining right will usually make the investment commitment of exploration and exploitation in the bid book. The government should supervise the performance of this commitment and avoid the behavior of mining enterprises without conducting shale gas exploration after the winning bid.
Third, the government should strengthen the safety supervision in exploration and production links and seriously investigate the legal liabilities of those responsible for the accidents to raise their illegal costs.
Fourth, the government should pay more attention to evaluating the environmental impact of the exploration and mining links, investigating the legal responsibility of those responsible for environmental pollution incidents, protecting the environment from prevention, and resolutely avoiding the situation of treatment after pollution.
In the UK and Canada, PPP projects are regularly reviewed and evaluated by a specialized regulatory agency [43]. In China, no special PPP supervision institution has yet been established. According to the experience of other countries, the government may establish a special PPP project supervision agency, which considers the interests of all participants and stakeholders in the project, and is responsible for the supervision and performance evaluation of PPP projects.
III. IMPLEMENTATION PATH OF THE PPP MODE IN SHALE GAS DEVELOPMENT
 How to apply the PPP mode determines whether the private capital can be successfully introduced into the shale gas exploitation industry of China to alleviate the cost stress and fund stress of the shale gas exploitation industry, and promote the healthy and vigorous development of shale gas exploitation industry. Meanwhile, it will also bring in a good investing benefit for the domestic and overseas private capital so that it will finally achieve the mutual benefit win-win goal between the shale gas exploitation industry of China and the domestic and overseas private capital, which has become the important innovation orientation of the shale gas exploitation industry of China. All of the above comes down to one point, the shale gas exploitation industry of China should insist in achieving gradually marketization and striving for the policy support and correlation subsidy from the government.
PPP means establishing cooperative partnership between the government and private capital as the basis in order to achieve the mutual benefit win-win goal so that the way to confirm the profit structure of each property profit and cost structure reasonably will be the important direction for innovation of the PPP mode.
A. Suggestion for running the PPP shale gas project by the government
Although PPP is an effective way for providing communal facilities or serves, it does not mean that it could be replaced for the effective governance and decision of the government. Therefore, the strong support by the government is so important for applying the PPP mode in the shale gas exploitation industry.
1. Opening shale gas mining rights to solve the problem of overlapping authorities
The exploration rights and mining rights of traditional oil and gas industry in China are first applied by enterprises and then approved by the Ministry of Land and Resources. At present, most of the mineral properties of oil and gas belong to CNPC, Sinopec, and China National Offshore Oil Corporation, and the minority of the mineral properties belongs to Yanchang Petroleum, China United Coalbed Methane Corporation, and Henan Coalbed Methane Corporation [44].
According to the data released by the Ministry of Land and Resources, in China, about 77% of 25 × 10^{12} m^{3} shale gas recoverable resources are in the existing oil and gas blocks [45]. Therefore, in order to avoid mineral rights disputing and legal question, the blocks that the Ministry of Land and Resources has taken in the first and second public tenders for the open mineral rights have basically avoided the overlap between shale gas and other mineral rights. In accordance with the data published by the Ministry of Land and Resources, the shale gas reserves of Chongqing, Sichuan, and Xinjiang are the top three in domestic. However, in the blocks which were sold through the second bidding by the Ministry of Land and Resources, there are only three blocks in Chongqing and none in Sichuan and Xinjiang. It is due to the fact that there is an existing serious problem about overlapping mineral rights between shale gas and conventional oil reservoirs in these provinces.
On November 22, 2012, the Ministry of Land and Resources published the notification about strengthening the exploration, exploitation, and supervision administration of shale gas. Four measures, which were about overlapping mineral rights, were offered by the notification, in order to encourage the exploration and exploitation of shale gas blocks. First, the mining right holders of oil and gas (contain coalbed methane) can explore and exploit shale gas according to the scope of mining rights. However, the mining right holders should not only transact alteration of property or add the kinds of exploration and exploitation processes but also hand over the implementation plan or development and utilization of the program of the shale gas exploration. Second, for oil and gas exploration areas with the potential of shale gas resources, if the mining right holders do not carry out the exploration of shale gas, on the premise of linking up the exploration and construction of oil and natural gas, the shale gas exploration right will be set up separately by the Ministry of Land and Resources. Third, with regard to some blocks where the oil and natural gas are not explored enough, the exploration prospect of oil and natural gas is uncertain, but these blocks possess exploration potential of shale gas, and if their mining right holders do not carry out shale gas exploration, they should withdraw the oil and gas blocks. Then, the Ministry of Land and Resources could set mineral rights again by law. Fourth, if the mining right holders have carried out shale gas exploration and exploitation, the holders should apply to the Ministry of Land and Resources for alteration of mining rights or additional exploration and mining within three months from the notification of publication [46].
Therefore, using the PPP mode in the shale gas industry, the government should carry out the reform of the mineral right system and adopt more measures to liberate much more shale gas blocks from the scope of mineral rights of auld minerals, so that it can make them become new blocks for invitation for bids. It could make much more new oil enterprises, and private oil enterprises have a chance to get the mineral rights of shale gas exploration and exploitation. Then, private capital could be attracted to make shale gas investment diversified, so as to speed up shale gas exploration and exploitation and offer much more resource space; otherwise, the meaning of setting new minerals by the Ministry of Land and Resources would be lost. Although the Ministry of Land and Resources published relevant notifications on November 22, 2012 which offered some solutions about mineral rights overlapping among different minerals in oil and gas blocks, so far as it goes, the effect of solving mineral rights overlapping is not good enough. The government should put policies into practice and make efforts to solve the mineral right overlapping problem and open shale gas mining rights to private capital.
2. Establishing thorough the law and regulation system of PPP
With the key of successfully running the PPP mode in China, it not only needs guidance by the policies and regulations of the government but also needs relevant legislation guarantee so that guaranteed private capital could get good profits and investment benefits. Using the PPP mode in the shale gas industry, the government should offer relevant policy support, which will supply resource exploitation rights, infrastructure and relevant supporting services, franchise rights, and others to enterprises. Furthermore, the government should establish a clear and complete system of laws and regulations for the PPP mode, and from a legal perspective, the responsibility, obligation, authority, risk of government, and private capital in PPP projects in each stage will be clearly defined, and it is also the key of using the PPP mode to cooperatively exploit shale gas between private capital and the government. The government should construct a good legal environment and a policy environment by means of tax preference, fiscal subsidies, credit preference, and others, in order to guarantee that the PPP mode can run well in a good external environment. At present, the government is formulating the relevant laws, regulations, and systems for the application of the PPP mode. Shale gas enterprises need to keep up with the government policy orientation so that it can match up the application of the relevant policy, laws, and regulations.
3. Establishing thorough capital market and credit guarantee system
The amount of shale gas project investment is so huge, and the payback period is long. As a result, private capital needs strong financial security to enter the shale gas industry. For using the PPP mode in the shale gas industry by the government, which needs thorough a capital market and credit guarantee systems. It is infeasible that the amount of shale gas project investment merely depends on the credit situation of the individual enterprises of private capital to arrange company financing. Thus, it needs the government to offer a thorough capital market, a bank service system, and a wholesome credit guarantee system to supply financing support for the PPP shale gas project.
4. Switching role, grasping the key processes
In the PPP project, the government is no longer a power organ but a partner. Therefore, the government should switch the role, switch the function of the government, emphasize the concept of cooperation and establish equality consciousness with the private capital enterprises, provide a good external environment for the PPP project, and do well in policy making, development planning, and supervision.
With the application of the PPP mode in the shale gas project, the government should also grasp the key links according to the unique characteristics of shale gas development. First of all, when the government weighs a shale gas project to adopt the PPP mode, it is necessary to carry out two argumentations for the PPP project, including VFM (Value for Money) argumentation and financial capacity argumentation [47]. The VFM argumentation means comparing the expected total life cycle cost under the traditional procurement mode (Public Sector Comparator, hereinafter referred to as P.SC) with the estimated total life cycle cost under the PPP mode (Life Cycle Cost, hereinafter referred to as LCC). The differential section between the two is the VFM (Value for Money), that is, VFM = P.SC − LCC. When VFM is greater than zero, it shows that it is more cost-effective to adopt PPP mode than traditional procurement mode, so that PPP mode should be adopted in shale gas project. Financial capacity argumentation is to measure the financial expenditure of the PPP project, evaluate the impact of the project on the current and future annual financial expenditure, provide the basis for the financial management of the PPP project, and effectively prevent and control the financial risk. For PPP projects that need government payment or feasibility gap subsidy, the annual budget responsibility should be no more than 10% of the total public budget expenditure. If the project has passed the argumentation of this capability, the government shall, when preparing the annual budget and the medium-term financial plan, incorporate the responsibilities of the project's financial expenditure into the budgetary planning. On the contrary, the PPP mode is not suitable for projects that have not passed these argumentations.
Second, in order to protect the environment and reduce the environment risk, the government has to establish a strict liability regime, such as information disclosure ordinance, which requires the shale gas exploitation enterprises to publish the chemical components of the fracturing fluid in the use of hydraulic fracturing technology to avoid toxic and harmful material pollution affecting the surrounding environment. For example, the “Regulation of the groundwater quality test before drilling” in Pennsylvania of the United States stipulates that if shale gas developers does not test the water quality before drilling, any groundwater contamination would be identified as a fault of nearby drilling. Then, the government would transfer the burden of proof. In addition, in order to solve the affordability problems, in many states of the United States, each well needs to have a guarantee letter, but only 8 states have set up a guarantee letter that is more than 5 × 10^{6} dollars per well, and for the moment, the guarantee letters of many states are not enough to make up for enormous loss [48].
Third, in the PPP mode, the duration of franchise rights provided by the government is from 10 years to 30 years or even longer. It requires that the government should transform the concept of local political achievements and guard against sacrificing long-term interests for short-term performance. As to government, the accession of private capital would relieve the present financing pressure. Yet, the excessive subsidy policy or commitment is supplied that will increase the government debt risk and increase the pressures of future fiscal spending. As to the enterprises that have offered private capital, if the cost of construction was reduced in the initial stage that may increase the operational and maintenance cost later, then it could increase the total cost so that the project failure risk would be increased. Therefore, the government should consider the two parties as one benefit community in the PPP shale gas project and deal well with current profit and long-term profit, which has to make decisions in the perspective of long-term profit.
B. Suggestions about the successfully running PPP shale gas project by enterprises
1. Actively promoting external cooperation, attracting large international oil company cooperation
At present, shale gas exploration and exploitation are still in the initial stage in China. There are so many problems, such as lack of exploitation experience, lack of core technology, and lack of data accumulation. The research on geological basis and exploitation technology is not thorough enough, and the key equipment and instrument also need to be complete. Reservoir evaluation technology, shale gas reservoir process technology, drilling and completion technology, staged fracturing, crack diagnosis technology, monitoring technology, and other core technologies need to be broken through. Meanwhile, in the whole exploration and exploitation processes, the development of important equipment such as exploration logging equipment, drilling tool, large-scale fracturing equipment, and downhole tools [44] needs much more time to be completed. Thus, it needs a huge research funding from the government and enterprises. However, rarely domestic equipment is in the experimental stage, and the gap between the actual demand and the market is huge.
Both the exploration stage and the exploitation stage of the shale gas project need lots of funds; especially for the exploration stage, a huge amount of funding is invested in the case of unidentified resources that will cause enormous risk for enterprises. Therefore, when implementing the PPP mode, shale gas exploration and development enterprises in China should focus on international cooperation and strive to attract international oil companies to cooperate in shale gas exploration and development. Therefore, it could attract better funds, technology, and management experience from domestic and abroad, and finally, it could accelerate the speed of the shale gas industry.
Regarding international cooperation, CNPC has been cooperating with Shell, ConocoPhillips, Hess, and other famous companies abroad for joint evaluation and PSC (Product Sharing Contract). For example, in terms of Sichuan basin, the Fushun-Yongchuan block is a cooperative development block by CNPC and Shell. Since 2009, these two companies have been carrying out the evaluation of shale gas resources jointly; 17 wells of completion wells got gas and 11 production wells got a gas amount of 0.9 × 10^{8} m^{3}. In addition, the Sichuan Neijiang-Chongqing Dazu geological evaluation operation jointly carried out by CNPC and ConocoPhillips is also in full swing [26].
2. Integrating effective resources, combining enterprises with different links
From the experience of America, the shale gas industry chain can be divided into three main parts: exploitation, equipment, and application. Exploitation includes exploration, increasing production, storage, and transportation. Equipment includes kinds of instruments and apparatus production. Application includes gas vehicle, gas power generation, and natural gas chemical industry [49]. It has been shown that the shale gas industry involves a lot of links and is professionally prominent. There is not an enterprise that has all the core technology of each stage of the shale gas industry chain, and in the whole shale gas industry chain, different enterprises in different stages have different core technologies and competitiveness. Therefore, in the implementation of the PPP mode, shale gas exploration and development enterprises in China, in order to reduce the risk of exploration and development of shale gas, should integrate effective resources, strengthen its financing ability, engineering ability, market operation ability, and management ability, which will form an effective resource structure and good organization and management.
For example, on December 2, 2014, the establishment of Chongqing Shale Gas Exploration and Development Co., Ltd, which was jointly funded by CNPC (40%), Chongqing Investment Shale Gas Exploitation and Utilization Limited Company (39%), SINOCHEM Petroleum Exploration and Development Co., Ltd. (20%), and Chongqing Geological and Mineral Research Institute (1%), will promote the exploration, development, production, and sales of shale gas resources within the range of 5 shale gas mineral right blocks in China and a total of 15 600 km^{2} [50].
CNPC has been encouraging reform and innovation and considers the cooperative exploitation and market competition as effective strategies for shale gas exploitation so that it develops many cooperative ways. As of November 2, 2014, CNPC had shale gas mineral rights of 56 500 km^{2} in Sichuan basin, including 75% domestic cooperation development, 10% international cooperation development, 3% risk operation development, and 12% self-development. At present, there are more than 40 gas wells, and the cumulative exploitation of shale gas is more than 2 × 10^{8} m^{3}. This means that the 4 development models of shale gas of CNPC have been largely formed. CNPC is also cooperating with local state-owned capital, such as Sichuan Changning Natural Gas Co., Ltd., whose registered capital is up to 3 × 10^{9} yuan, which is the first shale gas exploration and exploitation enterprise that is cooperated by the local enterprise and central enterprise, and its operation is very good at the moment. It is responsible for the exploration and exploitation of the Changning block, and the production of shale gas in 2014 can exceed 1 × 108 m^{3} [26].
3. Establishing the reasonable risk allocation mechanism with the government
The PPP mode requires the government and enterprises to establish partnerships and complete a project together, which is related to the risk allocation among stakeholders and partners. To carry out the PPP mode, it is necessary for public-private cooperation of both sides to establish a reasonable risk allocation plan in the early argumentation stage of the project, so as to share the risks of project financing, decision-making, construction, and operation and realize the goal of sharing profit and sharing risks between the government and private capital in the PPP mode.
4. Establishing efficient risk management mechanism
To do a good job in the risk management of the PPP shale gas project, the enterprise needs to establish a set of standard risk management mechanisms. Risk identification is the first step in risk management. Risk identification is the process of judgement, confirmation, and induction of potential risks in shale gas projects. The shale gas industry faces many risks, such as price risk, institutional risk, benefit risk, reputation risk, and geopolitical risk. When the enterprise operates the PPP mode, it must identify the risk of the project. After the risk identification and the initial classification, the enterprise should estimate the risk, that is, to estimate the probability and consequence of the possible occurrence of the risk event. The risk estimation is aimed at the single risk factor. However, in the process of shale gas exploitation, the factors of risk can interact on each other, so that it should measure the comprehensive risk of the whole project and analyze the extent to which the overall comprehensive risk may affect achieving the goal, so as to consider the risk tolerance of the PPP project.
5. Possessing enough compound PPP professional talents
As a new type of financing mode, the PPP mode involves the project financing, contract negotiation, project construction and operation, risk sharing, profit distribution, and other multistage multifaceted contents. Therefore, a number of compound professional talents, who not only know about finance but also know about laws and technology, are needed to sign and operate related contracts. Only the versatile professional talents who have the knowledge of the PPP policy and regulations and contract law and have a good grasp of the risk allocation mechanism and the operation procedure of the PPP project can provide the corresponding technical guidance services for enterprises. Therefore, if the private capital enterprises want to run the PPP mode successfully, abundant PPP professional talents are required.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper has analyzed the current situation and existing problems of the financing model of China's shale gas development, proposed the introduction of private capital in the development of shale gas, and adopted the PPP mode to activate the shale gas industry to realize the large-scale commercial development of shale gas. In addition, after analyzing the PPP mode and the characteristics of China's shale gas development, combining the operation mechanism of the PPP mode and the technology, the environment, and the market demand of shale gas development in China, this paper has analyzed the operation mechanism of the PPP mode in shale gas development in China from the aspects of the participants, risk allocation, government fiscal incentive policy, performance appraisal, market access mechanism, and supervision mechanism. Furthermore, this paper has made some suggestions from the perspective of the government and the enterprise to develop the idea of the PPP mode for shale gas development.
TABLE I. 
The risk allocation of the shale gas development project in the PPP mode.
TABLE II. 
The performance appraisal system of the shale gas development project in the PPP mode.
TABLE I. -body
Serial number	Risk categories	Risk factors	Allocation of risks
Public sector	Private sector	Shared
1	Project risk	Shale gas exploration risk			√
Shale gas exploitation risk		√	
2	Financial risk	Financing loan		√	
Interest rate risk		√	
Exchange rate risk		√	
3	Fiscal and tax policy risk	Fiscal and tax policy risk	√		
4	Withdrawal risk	Withdrawal risk		√	
5	Political risk	Government credit	√		
Government decision and approval delays	√		
Government intervention	√		
Political/public opposition	√		
Political force majeure	√		
6	Legal and regulatory risk	Imperfection of legal and regulatory systems	√		
Change in law	√		
7	Market risk	Fluctuation of the market price of shale gas			√
8	Contract risk	Contract risk			√
9	Force majeure risk	Force majeure risk			√
TABLE II. -body
Primary Index	Secondary Index
Project completion degree (A_{1})	Project management ability (A_{11})
Government regulatory capacity (A_{12})
Risk sharing rationality (A_{13})
Risk control effect (A_{14})
Rationality of fiscal and tax incentives (A_{15})
Social benefit (A_{2})	Government image promotion (A_{21})
Public satisfaction improvement (A_{22})
Consumer growth (A_{23})
Industry productivity improvement (A_{24})
Economic benefit (A_{3})	Increase in project revenue (A_{31})
Reduction of government investment (A_{32})
Optimization of energy consumption structure (A_{33})
Low-carbon economy transition (A_{34})
Sustainability (A_{4})	Environmental effect of project development (A_{41})
Energy saving effect of facilities (A_{42})
FIG. 1. 
Distribution of shale gas in China.
FIG. 2. 
PPP mode of shale gas development in China.
