Introducing hinge mechanisms to one compressive-mode piezoelectric energy harvester
In this paper, a hinge mechanism is introduced into one compressive-mode piezoelectric energy harvester to improve its performance. First, the concept of implementing hinge mechanisms is introduced on a high-efficiency compressive-mode piezoelectric energy harvester (HC-PEH). Second, a numerical model based on the piezoelectric constitutive equation and the Duffing oscillator equations is formulated to obtain voltage responses, velocity responses, and the fundamental frequency and bandwidth. Then, a prototype is fabricated to validate the results of the model. Depending on the number of hinges applied to the HC-PEH, three cases are investigated: fully hinged, partially hinged, and clamped. In both numerical modeling and experimental studies, the HC-PEH prototypes in the three cases are exposed to frequency-sweep excitations to illustrate the dynamic and transduction behaviors. The results demonstrate that the overall performance in the hinged cases is improved significantly compared to that in the clamped case. The output voltage and output power are increased by 2–3 times and up to 5 times, respectively, and fundamental resonant frequency is lowered to below 20 Hz. Furthermore, it is shown that the operational bandwidth is widened by up to 37%.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the last decade, significant advances in the development of electronic devices have led to great need for small-scale and portable power sources. However, conventional chemical batteries reveal more and more disadvantages such as limited lifespan, disposal pollution, and regular replacement requirement. To overcome these shortages, researchers have been attempting to convert ambient energy from the environment to electricity for alternative power supplies. One of the methods, piezoelectric energy harvesting, captures a great deal of attention due to its high power density, structural simplicity, and low power consumption. Nonetheless, piezoelectric energy harvesters (PEHs) have not been applied widely owing to their own limitations. First, PEHs work most efficiently merely at resonant-frequency excitation, while the performance decreases greatly when excitation frequency deviates from resonance. Current PEHs are still unable to generate a considerable amount of electricity in many ambient vibrational situations where frequency is lower than 10 Hz. Second, the bandwidth, which is the frequency interval for PEHs to generate a certain amount of electricity, is usually too narrow to make PEHs widely applicable.
Several techniques have been suggested to tackle the two aforementioned problems independently. Frequency tuning of PEHs, both actively and passively, is proposed to reduce the fundamental resonant frequency (FRF). Active tuning is advanced with tuning actuators or an alternating capacitive load and a low power microcontroller to match external excitation frequency in real time ( [Roundy and Zhang, 2005] and  [Wu et_al, 2006]), while passive tuning involves external power or other designs ( [Baker et_al, 2005] and  [Mann and Sims, 2009]). However, those frequency tuning means consume some part of the produced power or require external power sources or include bulky mass or long beams. A design of a nonlinear tuning technique via a variable external, attractive magnetic force ( [Reissman et_al, 2009]) is demonstrated so that the resonance of the piezoelectric energy harvester is able to be tuned with the adjustment of a slider mechanism. An inertial vibrating energy harvester unit ( [Singh et_al, 2012]) adapting to the tire vibration frequency spectra is investigated to power a sensor module inside the tire. A method was exposed relying on ultralow-cost frequency sensing combined with an energy-efficient stiffness tuning through the use of an additional actuator ( [Lallart et_al, 2010]) to ensure that the harvester resonance frequency matches the base motion frequency, without any external intervention.
Besides frequency tuning techniques, axial preload has been investigated to lower the FRF. The studies on the effect of axial preload on PEHs can be categorized into two types: on piezoelectric materials and on specific models.  [Lynch (1996)] and  [Chaplya and Carman (2001)] discovered and studied the nonlinear behavior of piezoelectric stack actuators under large signal combined electromechanical loading conditions. The real responses of piezoelectric ceramics exhibited a significant hysteresis and nonlinearity when large signal loads (electric field and/or stress) were applied. It was also demonstrated by  [Zhou (2003)] that the relative dielectric constant and piezoelectric charge constants were no longer constant when the material was subjected to high uniaxial compressive stress. As for preload on PEH models,  [Leland and Wright (2006a)],  [Eichhorn et_al (2008)], and  [Hu et_al (2007)] proposed axial preload to soften structures by altering the resonance frequencies. Leland and Wright demonstrated that a compressive axial preload could reduce the resonance frequency of a bimorph energy harvester through experimental approaches. A theoretical model by  [Masana and Daqaq (2011)] indicated that the fundamental frequency decreased evidently as the axial load increased. Another investigation was performed by  [Kim et_al (2005)] to study the performance and responses of a cymbal transducer under high pre-stress. Although the decrease in fundamental frequency of PEHs can be significant theoretically and experimentally, the inherent brittle nature of most commonly used piezoelectric ceramics can lead to a dramatic decrease in the lifespan of PEHs when they are imposed continuously by preload for a long time.
The narrow bandwidth problem is approached in several ways such as by designing an array of different small generators with a frequency spectrum ( [Shahruz, 2006b]) or integration of multiple bimorphs with different dimensions of piezoelectric plates ( [Xue et_al, 2008] and  [Feng and Hung, 2007]) or multiple cantilever beams ( [Ferrari et_al, 2008]). A stochastic approach ( [Adhikari et_al, 2009]) was presented based on a stack configuration to harvest broadband vibration energy, a more practically available ambient source. A broadband piezoelectric energy harvester based on the bistable Duffing oscillator ( [Erturk and Inman, 2011]) was proposed and studied thoroughly.
Another effective means to improve the energy scavenging capabilities of PEHs is to employ nonlinearity to decrease resonant frequency and to expand the bandwidth. Nonlinear geometric beams have been brought forward with different configurations such as zigzag ( [Karami and Inman, 2011]), L ( [Erturk et_al, 2009]), crab-leg ( [Boisseau et_al, 2013]), and H shapes ( [Amri et_al, 2011]). Also,  [Dhote et_al (2015)] proposed a design to mount piezoelectric plates onto orthoplanar springs. Another perspective to employ nonlinearity is to introduce magnetic elements into PEHs. Various designs have come up to combine magnetic components with PEHs. Generally, the designs can be categorized as mono-stable ( [Jiang and Chen, 2013]), bi-stable ( [Xu et_al, 2013];  [Stanton et_al, 2010]; and  [Li and Qin, 2015]), and tri-stable ( [Zhou et_al, 2014]) based on the dynamic characteristics. Despite the fact that the bandwidth can be broadened in those models, the overall volume of PEHs is generally enlarged a lot, which results in the decline of power density.
Most of the aforementioned research is based on PEHs working in the bending mode. Some researchers brought forward PEH models working in compressive and torsional modes. Kim presented a compressive model with two bowl-shape plates sandwiching one circular piezoelectric plate ( [Kim et_al, 2004]). Chen brought forward a piezoelectric generator of torsional modes scavenging energy from angular vibrations ( [Chen et_al, 2007]).  [Abdelkefi et_al (2011)] proposed a unimorph cantilever model working in coupled bending-torsion modes. Yang et_al took advantage of structural nonlinearity ( [Yang et_al, 2015] and  [Yang and Zu, 2015]) and developed high-efficiency piezoelectric energy harvesters (HC-PEHs) working in the compressive mode ( [Yang and Zu, 2016] and  [Yang et_al, 2016a],  [2016b]). The HC-PEH model achieved high power density, low natural frequency, and quite wide bandwidth. Nonetheless, there still remains a long way before the HC-PEH can become applicable in ambient low-frequency (below 10 Hz) energy harvesting situations.
In this paper, a concept of hinge mechanism is introduced into piezoelectric energy harvesters to lower the FRF, broaden the bandwidth, and increase the voltage output. First, the concept is proposed and the HC-PEH is employed. Second, a numerical model is built by formulating governing equations based on the Duffing oscillator equation and the linear constitutive equation. The governing equations are solved numerically, and analysis is conducted to estimate the performance. Also, a prototype is built to validate the numerical model. Three cases are investigated depending on the number of hinges introduced into the HC-PEH: fully hinged, partially hinged, and clamped. In each case, the hinged or clamped HC-PEH undergoes excitation with frequency sweep. Finally, analytical and experimental results are compared, discussed, and concluded.
II. INTRODUCING HINGE MECHANISMS TO PEHs
Many PEH designs have been proposed so far. Most of the PEH structures include one or more piezoelectric components attached to a substrate such as one aluminum beam with a uniform cross-section. The beams are usually fixed or clamped onto host structures. When a PEH is exposed to vibrations, the longitudinal motion is, in general, trivial compared to the transversal one ( [Stephen, 2001]). For a beam performing transverse motion, the resonant frequency varies depending on boundary conditions. For a beam clamped at both ends, the resonant frequency is expressed as ( [Rao, 1974])
For a beam pinned at both ends, the resonant frequency is expressed as
where l is the length of the beam.
Accordingly, if the clamped boundary condition is substituted by a pinned one, namely, the hinge boundary condition, the FRF (n =1)is reduced. When FRF is smaller, the frequency interval, in which PEHs produce a considerable amount of electricity, becomes easier for PEHs to reach. Thus, PEHs with low FRF become more applicable as most ambient vibration situations have low frequencies. Meanwhile, larger deflection of the beams is caused, resulting in larger strain in the piezoelectric component(s). As the piezoelectric material undergoes more deformation, larger voltage is then generated, which further leads to more electricity.
Hinge mechanisms exhibit very wide application prospects as they can be implemented into almost all the PEH structures to improve the performance with respect to the bandwidth, output voltage, and resonant frequency. PEH structures usually have one or more fixation edges onto the host structure(s). As for those with only one fixation edge, the widely recognized structure is the cantilever beam mounted by a tip mass with many configuration variations such as the bi-stable or tri-stable ones and L-shape or zigzag-shape ones. In a cantilever PEH structure, the clamped connection between the elastic beam and the host structure can be alternated to be partially hinged and partially clamped; Fig. 1 shows the top view of the alternation. The substitution of the boundary condition leads to a significant decrease in structural stiffness especially when the edge is hinged more than clamped. Structural stiffness reduction has two major effects on PEHs: reducing the resonant frequency and enlarging the deflection of the piezoelectric layer harvesting more power. In fact, more hinge mechanisms can be embedded into the cantilever plate plane, as depicted in Fig. 1(c), to achieve larger aforementioned desirable effects.
Regarding PEH structures with two or more fixation edges, the clamped boundaries can be replaced completely. An example is presented here based on the ultra-wide bandwidth PEH structure ( [Hajati and Kim, 2011]). In the structure, the plate is clamped to host structures on both sides and a proof mass is mounted in the middle of the plate. Thus, as shown in Fig. 2, both edges can be supplanted with hinge mechanisms totally.
Although many PEH structures are available to conduct the replacements of clamped boundary conditions to hinged ones, to demonstrate the merits of the proposed approach, one compressive-mode harvester—the HC-PEH—is selected due to the symmetry of the structure, making it easy to integrate hinge mechanisms. Figure 3(a) illustrates the schematic design of the hinged HC-PEH. The core component of the energy harvester is the piezoelectric plate sandwiched by bow-shape beams in the middle. Two proof masses are fixed onto the bow-shape beams. The proof masses and the host structures are hinged by two elastic beams with uniform cross-sections. The structure is exposed to vertical excitation. By utilizing the two-stage amplification mechanism, the excitation is enlarged twice, once by the elastic beams and then by the bow-shape beams. Meanwhile, the piezoelectric plate is under dynamic compressive force when working. To make it easy for further discussions, each hinge is assumed as a node numbered by 1, 2, 3, and 4 from left to right. The effect regarding the number of introduced hinges is studied later.
Figure 3(b) shows the structure design of the hinged HC-PEH. The design of the proposed energy harvester is mainly composed of components shown in Fig. 3(a) with the hinge mechanism represented by four connectors and eight sets of bearings and holders. In the two ends of the design, the connectors are hinged to host structures and the two beams are fixed with connectors. Also, the other ends of the beams are hinged through connectors. It should be noted that the hinge number is not limited to four in the HC-PEH structure in Fig. 3. Each elastic beam can be broken into smaller-length elements and connected with hinges between each element.
III. MODELING OF THE HINGED HC-PEH
In the modeling process, based on the linear constitutive equation and the Duffing oscillator equation, the governing equations are derived as
in which m, c, k_{1}, k_{3}, θ, X, Z, C_{p}, and R are assumed as the equivalent mass (proof masses, bearings, holder, etc.), damping coefficient, linear stiffness, nonlinear stiffness, coupling factor, displacement, excitation, equivalent internal capacitance of the piezoelectric plate, and external load, respectively.
The excitation hereby is set as harmonic
where A and ω are the amplitude and angular frequency, respectively. The operators (⋅)^{′} and (⋅)^{′′} are the first and the second order differentiation with respect to time t, respectively.
The governing equation ns are partially differential equations and are solved numerically. Let x_{1}, x_{2}, and x_{3} represent X, X^{′}, and V, respectively. Then, Eqs. (3) and (4) are transformed to the state-space form
The constants in Eqs. (6)–(8) are listed in Table I, in which k_{1} is calculated via Hooke's law by measuring the deflection of the harvester under a certain force applied onto the central area. The deflection and the force are obtained using a caliber and a digital force gauge (the details will be presented in Sec. IV in Fig. 6). Other parameters, which are c, k_{3}, and θ, are matched through experiments. To study the effect of the hinge number on the performance of the HC-PEH, three cases are investigated: case 1 represents that all the four nodes are hinged; case 2 represents that node 1 and node 4 are hinged while the others are fixed; case 3 represents that all the nodes are fixed. To simulate the open-circuit condition, a high value of R is adopted.
In the three cases, velocity response and voltage response are the two indexes to study the performance of the hinged compressive-mode energy harvester. In case 3, the model is in fact the HC-PEH model proposed by Yang et_al It has been investigated thoroughly from perspectives of force analysis, dynamic modeling, and experimental studies. Accordingly, no analytical study is conducted in case 3. In this paper, case 3 serves for experiment comparison purposes.
The numerical results in case 1 are presented in Fig. 4, in which the voltage and velocity respond to frequency sweep nonlinearly. When frequency is lower than 12.5 Hz, the voltage and velocity increase slowly along with the increment of frequency. Then, both indexes rise rapidly to the highest values when frequency reaches 17.5 Hz. Subsequently, a jump down phenomenon occurs, which means that the voltage and velocity decrease dramatically from peaks. The frequency right before the jump phenomenon is called the FRF of the HC-PEH. Afterwards, the two indexes continue to decrease at a rather slow rate. The peak-peak voltage, peak-peak velocity, and FRF are 72 V, 0.95 m/s, and 17.5 Hz, respectively. In addition, the voltage is around 5.5 V when the excitation frequency is below 10 Hz. The numerical voltage and velocity of downward frequency sweep are illustrated in Figs. 4(c) and 4(d). The peak-peak voltage and velocity are 42 V and 0.44 m/s, respectively.
Figure 5 illustrates the numerical results in case 2. The voltage and velocity responses follow similar nonlinear patterns as the results in Fig. 4: slow increasing—fast increasing—jump down phenomenon—slow decreasing. The upward frequency sweep results show that the peak-peak voltage, peak-peak velocity, and FRF are 52 V, 0.75 m/s, and 18.9 Hz, respectively. Also, under low-frequency (below 10 Hz) excitation, the voltage is slightly lower than that in case 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A prototype was fabricated based on the structure design in Fig. 3, and a series of experiments were conducted to validate the results of the numerical model. The experimental setup, which is illustrated in Fig. 6, mainly consists of a computer, a controller, a power amplifier, an energy harvester, a shaker, a laser vibrometer (Polytec Inc. OFV-534), and an oscilloscope (Tektronix 3014). The energy harvester, including beams and hinges, is connected to the shaker through clamps. Harmonic excitation is provided by the shaker (The Modal Shop Inc. 2075E), and the feedback signal is monitored and gauged using an accelerometer (Kistler Instrument Corporation). The signal is also regulated by the controller based on the input conditions in an interface of a software named as DAC-8 in the computer through the amplifier (The Modal Shop Inc. 2100E21). The input conditions include the frequency sweep rate and range, excitation amplitude, and so on. The signals of voltage response are recorded using the oscilloscope. The signals of velocity response are measured using the laser vibrometer and later stored in the oscilloscope.
A series of experiments were conducted to study the voltage responses, velocities, bandwidth, etc. in the first stage under the open-circuit impedance condition. Then, more experiments are carried out for impedance matching with the piezoelectric element connected directly to different external loads. The experiments are conducted on a platform with little undesirable interference. The prototype is under weak excitation of 0.2 g. Both upward and downward frequency sweeps are conducted with the rate of 0.2 Hz/s. The physical and geometric properties of the prototype are listed in Table II.
Besides FRF and peak-peak voltage, bandwidth is also employed as another primary index to evaluate the performance. Although there are many definitions for bandwidth in voltage responses of piezoelectric energy harvesting, here the signal bandwidth refers to a frequency range in which the voltage amplitude in the response spectral is above and equal to half of the largest voltage amplitude.
For case 1, Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) illustrate the voltage and velocity responses from experiments of upward frequency sweep. Velocity responses are observed at the center of the top square areas of bearing holders. The peak-peak voltage reaches approximately 74 V. In addition, the FRF, peak-peak velocity, and the bandwidth are 18.8 Hz, 0.93 m/s, and 4.4 Hz, respectively. In the meantime, the voltage value reaches around 6 V under low frequency (lower than 10 Hz) excitation. Figures 7(c) and 7(d) show the experimental voltage output and velocity of the fully hinged HC-PEH with backward frequency sweep. The peak-peak voltage, FRF, bandwidth, and peak-peak velocity are approximately 52 V, 17.3 Hz, 2.6 Hz, and 0.7 m/s, respectively.
For case 2, Figs. 8(a) and 8(b) depict the experimental results of upward frequency sweep. The peak-peak voltage, FRF, bandwidth, and peak-peak velocity are around 56 V, 19.5 Hz, 4.1 Hz, and 0.73 m/s, respectively. Meanwhile, the low-frequency excitation voltage is around 4.5 V. The voltage output and velocity of backward frequency sweep in case 2 from experiments are presented in Figs. 8(c) and 8(d). The peak-peak voltage, FRF, bandwidth, and peak-peak velocity are approximately 45 V, 20.3 Hz, 2.2 Hz, and 0.62 m/s, respectively.
For case 3, Figs. 9(a) and 9(b) show the experimental results of the clamped HC-PEH of upward frequency sweep. The peak-peak voltage, FRF, bandwidth, and peak-peak velocity are about 29 V, 20.8 Hz, 3.2 Hz, and 0.52 m/s, respectively. Also, the voltage is around 2.5 V when frequency is lower than 10 Hz. Figures 9(a) and 9(b) show the results from experiments of backward frequency sweep in case 3. The peak-peak voltage, FRF, and bandwidth are about 21.8 V, 21.5 Hz, and 2.07 Hz, respectively.
Another important aspect to appraise the performance of a PEH is the power output. To investigate into this matter in terms of embedded hinges, the peak-peak voltages of the harvester are experimentally measured under resonance by connecting the piezoelectric element to a series of loads to derive the peak-peak power (Maximum Power illustrated in Fig. 10) via the equation P_{max} = U_{p-p}^{2}/R, in which U_{p-p} is the peak-peak voltage and R is the external load. As the partially hinged case serves as an intermediate comparison purpose, merely case 1 and case 3 are studied to show the distinct power output difference.
V. DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the differences between numerical results and experimental results are analyzed and the influence from the hinge mechanisms on the dynamic and electrical responses is discussed.
Although the numerical results and experimental data in each individual case validate each other to a large extent, three major differences still remain. The first one is the symmetry of the numerical estimation and experimental velocity responses to frequency axes in contrast to asymmetry of the experimental voltage responses. The moduli of peak voltage and velocity below the frequency axis are different from those above the axis. The top reason for this phenomenon is the inertia of the masses mounted to the caps. More deformation is caused due to the gravity of the proof masses when the piezoelectric plate is moving downward. Thus, extra work is needed to overcome the potential energy of the masses when the plate is moving upward, leading to less deformation in the elastic beams and the piezoelectric plate and smaller voltage and velocity output. Another reason accountable is the fabricated structure asymmetry. The transduction unit (bow-shape beams, piezoelectric plate, holders, etc.) can be safely assumed as an equivalent mass block. As the assumed structure is symmetric as presented in Fig. 11(a), the velocity responses are symmetric to the frequency axes. Due to the assembly inaccuracy in the fabrication process shown in Fig. 11(b), the parts with the block are not symmetrically aligned. When exposed to harmonic excitation, the block in Fig. 11(a) undergoes the force of the same magnitude generated by the two beams (beam 12 and beam 34). Then, the forces are transmitted so that compressive and tensile forces are applied alternatively onto the piezoelectric element. The force transmission is closely related to the applied direction. Due to the structure asymmetry, when the piezoelectric element reaches maximum positive displacement, the transmitted force is thus different to a small extent from that when the piezoelectric element reaches minimum negative displacement. Because the voltage is proportional to the compressive or tensile force, the moduli of the positive and negative peak values in the voltage responses are different to some extent in all the experimental voltage outputs.
Another difference is the point where the jump-down phenomenon occurs. For example, in case one, the FRF in Fig. 7 is 18.8 Hz, slightly higher than 17.5 Hz in Fig. 4. The last major difference is that the simulation velocity interval at frequency lower than 10 Hz is smaller than that in experimental results for cases 1 and 2. The principal reasons for the deviation of FRF and low-frequency velocity interval are the errors in the measurements of linear stiffness and in the fitting curves to derive nonlinear stiffness and damping coefficients.
The first important influence of introducing hinge mechanisms into the HC-PEH is the reduction of FRF from 20.8 Hz down to around 18 Hz, a reduction of 15%. Figure 12 depicts the comparison of FRF in the three cases. Despite the fact that the percentage is not very significant, the decrement in FRF is still a decent advance toward piezoelectric energy harvesting from low frequency excitations to make the HC-PEH more applicable in the low-frequency ambient vibration environment. This effect is largely attributed to the great reduction of the linear stiffness. In fact, the linear stiffness, which is measured and shown in Table I, decreases greatly by over 60% in case 1 and by about 50% in case 2 compared to that in case 3 (The linear stiffness in case 3 is obtained with a value of 1010 N/m from the similar gauged force and deflection of the harvester with those in case 1 and case 2.)
Another two significant aspects of the influence are the improved voltage response and output power. Figure 13 shows comparisons of peak-peak voltage in three cases (p-p is short for peak-peak). The peak-peak voltage in case 1 is 3.5 times as high as that in case 3. Even when the structure is partially hinged in case 2, the peak-peak voltage is raised by approximately 100%, which is still a remarkable improvement. Accordingly, the peak-peak voltage is increased evidently by introducing hinge mechanisms into the HC-PEH. Furthermore, the power outputs in Fig. 10 show that the peak-peak power in case 1 reaches about 5 times as high as that in case 3. Noting that the volume of the energy harvester remains the same when hinges are introduced, the power density, which is defined by power divided by volume, can also be raised to the same extent.
Also, through comparison of the output voltage under excitation lower than 10 Hz, it is notable to point out that the introduction of hinge mechanisms enhances the voltage output of the HC-PEH under low frequency excitation. In addition, Fig. 14 illustrates the bandwidth comparisons with the hinge number. The working bandwidth is expanded from 3.2 Hz to 4.4 Hz, an increase in 37.5%. Given the FRF is 18.8 Hz and the bandwidth is 4.4 Hz in the fully hinged case, a quite amount of electricity can be generated when the frequency is just above 14.4 Hz.
It can be safely concluded from Figs. 10–12 that the number of applied hinges on the HC-PEH has a significant positive effect on the performance improvements. The more hinges brought into the structure the more desirable performance the harvester shows. First, from upward frequency sweep, the FRF in Fig. 9 decreases along with the increase in the hinge number and reaches the lowest value when the structure is fully hinged; both the peak-peak voltage in Fig. 11 and the bandwidth in Fig. 12 increase with the increment of the hinge number and become the largest in the fully hinged case. Also, from the perspective of the velocity responses in cases 1, 2, and 3, peak-peak velocity decreases correspondingly with peak-peak voltage from case 1 to case 3, demonstrating that more hinges applied to the HC-PEH result in more satisfactory dynamic responses, validating the phenomenon of voltage increment with the increase in the hinge number. The reason for the voltage-velocity correspondence is that replacing clamps with hinges facilitates the first-stage force amplification process in the elastic beams. Thus, larger acceleration of the proof masses is elicited, resulting in larger velocity responses. Furthermore, the results of FRF, peak-peak voltage, and bandwidth from backward frequency sweep also manifest that introducing more hinges into the HC-PEH structure leads to more satisfactory dynamic and transduction results.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents the idea of using the hinge mechanism to improve energy harvester performance. A HC-PEH prototype has been fabricated and embedded with the hinge mechanism. The developed hinge-based energy harvester has been numerically modeled and systematically tested. The model estimation has a relatively good agreement with the experimental data and demonstrates the superior effect of the hinge mechanism on the performance of the HC-PEH. Specifically, compared to the clamped counterpart, the fully hinged HC-PEH prototype shows a 2–3 times higher voltage output, an ∼15% lower FRF, and a 37% broader frequency bandwidth. In addition, the number of hinges into the HC-PEH structure has a significant influence on the performance improvement: the more the hinges are introduced the higher voltage response the HC-PEH exhibits. Future work can be concentrated on building a more sophisticated analytical model and conducting parametric studies on how structure geometry affects the performance as well as applications of hinge mechanisms on other PEH structures.
TABLE I. 
Constants in Eqs. (6)–(8).
TABLE II. 
Physical and geometric properties of the prototype in experiments.
TABLE I. -body
	k_{1} (N/m)	c (kg/s)	k_{3} (N/m^{3})	θ (N/V)	m (g)	C_{p} (nF)	A (m/s^{2})	R
Case 1	318.2	1.329	0.125 × 10^{8}	2.4 × 10^{−4}	40	30	0.2 g	10^{8} Ω
Case 2	477.3	1.993
TABLE II. -body
Description	Value
The elastic beam	Length	40 mm
Width	5 mm
Thickness	0.5 mm
Density	2700 kg/m^{3}
Young's modulus	69 GPa
Bow shape beam	Angle	Arctan(0.1)
Length	40 mm
Width	15 mm
Thickness	0.5 mm
Node 2 and node 3	Equivalent mass	40 g
Piezoelectric plate	Dimensions	40 × 15 × 0.7 mm^{3}
Density	2700 kg/m^{3}
Young's modulus	63 GPa
Dielectric constant, ε_{11}	3170
Piezoelectric charge constant, d_{31}	−275 × 10^{−12} C/N
Piezoelectric voltage constant, g_{31}	−9.3 × 10^{−3} Vm/N
FIG. 1. 
Top view of integrated hinge mechanisms with a cantilever PEH. (a) Clamped cantilever, (b) partially hinged cantilever, and (c) plate plane with embedded hinges.
FIG. 2. 
Integrating the ultra-wide bandwidth PEH structure with hinge mechanisms.
FIG. 3. 
Design of the hinged HC-PEH. (a) Schematic of the hinged HC-PEH. (b) Structure design of the hinged HC-PEH.
FIG. 4. 
Numerical voltage and velocity responses in case 1. (a) Voltage response of upward frequency sweep. (b) Velocity response of upward frequency sweep. (c) Voltage response of downward frequency sweep. (d) Velocity response of downward frequency sweep.
FIG. 5. 
Numerical voltage and velocity responses in case 2. (a) Voltage response of upward frequency sweep. (b) Velocity response of upward frequency sweep. (c) Voltage response of downward frequency sweep. (d) Velocity response of downward frequency sweep.
FIG. 6. 
Experimental setup for the hinged HC-PEH.
FIG. 7. 
Experimental voltage output and velocity of frequency sweep in case 1. (a) Voltage response of upward frequency sweep. (b) Velocity response of upward frequency sweep. (c)Voltage response of backward frequency sweep. (d) Velocity response of backward frequency sweep.
FIG. 8. 
Experimental voltage output and velocity of frequency sweep in case 2. (a) Voltage response of upward frequency sweep. (b) Velocity response of upward frequency sweep. (c) Voltage response of backward frequency sweep. (d) Velocity response of backward frequency sweep.
FIG. 9. 
Experimental voltage output and velocity of frequency sweep in case 3. (a) Voltage response of upward frequency sweep. (b) Velocity response of upward frequency sweep. (c) Voltage response of backward frequency sweep. (d) Velocity response of backward frequency sweep.
FIG. 10. 
Maximum power outputs in case 1 and case 3 in the load spectrum.
FIG. 11. 
Simplified schematic and prototype structure asymmetry. (a) Simplified schematic for velocity observation. (b) Demonstration of asymmetrically aligned parts in the prototype.
FIG. 12. 
Comparison of FRF in the three cases.
FIG. 13. 
Comparison of peak-peak voltage in three cases.
FIG. 14. 
Comparison of the bandwidth in three cases.
