Phase noise reduction by optical phase-locked loop for a coherent bichromatic laser based on the injection-locking technique
We present a coherent bichromatic laser system with low phase noise. An optical injection process is used to generate coherent laser beams with a frequency difference of 9.192 631 77 GHz using an electro-optical modulator. An optical phase-locked loop is then applied to reduce the phase noise. The phase noise of the beat note is −41, −81, −98, −83, and −95 dBrad^{2}/Hz at the offset frequencies of 1 Hz, 100 Hz, 1 kHz, 10 kHz, and 1 MHz, respectively. Compared to a system that uses optical injection alone, the phase noise is reduced by up to 20–30 dB in the low-frequency range, and the intermodulation effect on the continuous atomic clock is reduced by an order of magnitude. This configuration can adjust the intensities and polarizations of the laser beams independently and reduce the phase noise caused by environmental disturbances and optical injection, which may be useful for application to atomic coherence experiments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Coherent bichromatic lasers are important for applications in the field of atomic coherence experiments, including coherent population trapping-based clocks [1–3], atom interferometry [4,5], and other precision spectroscopy method [6]. In numerous scenarios, the frequency stability of the laser beat note in the time domain, or the phase noise in the frequency domain, in which the carrier frequency may be equal to the hyperfine splitting of an atom, is very important for atomic coherence experiments [7]. In an atom interferometer, the phase noise of the bichromatic laser that is used to manipulate the atomic wave packets affects the sensitivity of the interferometer, which is dependent on both the phase noise spectral density and the pulse duration [8,9]. Furthermore, in pulsed atomic frequency standards, because the atom is periodically interrogated to correct the local oscillator (LO) with dead time, the LO phase noise then limits the frequency stability of the clock through down-conversion of the intrinsic oscillator frequency noise, which is at a higher frequency than the interrogation frequency at harmonies of the pulse rate, into the LO control loop. This is known as the “Dick effect” or, in a continuous atomic clock, the intermodulation effect [10,11].
There are several ways to realize the phase locking of two lasers with a large operating frequency difference and low residual phase noise. One possible way is to use a heterodyne optical phase-locked loop (OPLL), in which a slave laser and a master laser are phase locked directly to a stable radio-frequency (RF) reference signal by detecting the phase error signal between the beat note of the two lasers and the RF signal and then correcting the current of the slave laser through a wideband phase-locked loop [12,13]. Another way involves modulation of the lasers to generate the desired sidebands. An acousto-optic modulator (AOM) can be used to shift the frequency of a laser, but the application of AOMs is limited because of their low efficiency at high shifting frequencies above 1 GHz [14]. An electro-optic modulator (EOM) can also be used to generate the desired sidebands [15], but these sidebands and the carrier generally overlap in the optical path, which is inconvenient for applications where separate adjustment of the polarization or power of each spectral line is required. Alternatively, a vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) can be modulated directly using an RF signal to generate the desired sidebands. However, because of the limited output power and linewidth of VCSELs [16], an optical amplifier may be required in highly stable applications. The injection-locking technique is usually used to amplify the sidebands that are generated using an EOM or a modulated VCSEL [17,18]. When the appropriate current and temperature are used for the slave laser, the specific sideband of the seed can be selected and amplified using the slave laser while the other undesired sidebands are suppressed. The desired sideband can be amplified to the level of several hundred milliwatts using this method, and it is also spatially separated from the master laser.
Coherent bichromatic lasers can be applied to an atomic frequency standard, which directs coherent lasers onto a cold cesium beam in two regions and has the characteristics of an all-optical clock rather than the classical microwave cavity. In our previous work [19], a coherent bichromatic laser operating at 852 nm with a frequency difference equal to that between the two hyperfine levels of the cesium ground state was generated by optical injection; a schematic diagram of this laser is shown in the dashed box in Fig. 1. A fiber EOM (FEOM) was applied to generate the sidebands using a 9.192 GHz signal from the master laser, and the powers of the desired sideband and the master laser were amplified by two slave lasers using the injection-locking technique. After coupling and splitting of the beams from the two slave lasers, the coherent bichromatic laser beam is split into two parts and aligned such that it is orthogonal to the cold atomic beam at a distance L. Another probe beam is used to detect the fluorescence signal of the Ramsey interference fringe. In this experiment, the design of the coherent lasers offers a convenient way to adjust the intensities and polarizations of the two color lasers independently. However, the phase coherence of the bichromatic laser was found to be seriously degraded when measured at the far-end position (position B in Fig. 1) during our experiments; this degradation could be caused by air turbulence, vibration of the mirrors, or injection amplification. The poor performance of the coherent laser leads to a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for the continuous cold atomic clock signal. Additionally, the short-term frequency stability of the clock will also be degraded by an aliasing effect, which is determined by the phase noise of the coherent beams.
In this paper, we present a hybrid-type scheme that uses an optical phase-locked loop (OPLL) to reduce the phase noise of the coherent bichromatic laser.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A schematic diagram of the proposed hybrid-type scheme is shown in Fig. 1. The frequency of the master laser is locked to the F = 4 → F′ = 3 transition of the Cs D2 line with 850 MHz red detuned offset locking using a saturated absorption spectroscopy technique. Three lasers are used in this setup: a master laser provides the seed light, and two slaves are then used to amplify the required laser beams. The master laser output is split into two beams. One beam is injected directly into a slave laser (SL1) for amplification at a frequency equal to that of the master laser. The other beam passes through an FEOM (PM-0K5-10, EOSPACE) that is driven using a dielectric resonator oscillator (DRO: free-running at 9.2 GHz) to generate the sidebands and is then injected into another slave laser (SL2). The first-order sideband is then amplified by adjusting the temperature and current of SL2. Despite the coherence of the two beams from the slave lasers that results from the optical injection process, the phase noise still deteriorates.
To reduce the phase noise of the coherent bichromatic laser, an optical phase-locked loop is applied. At position B in Fig. 1, which is very close to the interaction zone between the bichromatic laser beams and the cold atoms, the phase noise is detected and used to correct the driving frequency of the FEOM. A feedback loop is also applied at position A, which is located close to the laser system. When compared with traditional optical injection systems that operate without optical phase locking, this scheme can not only produce spatially separated phase-coherent laser beams but also reduce the phase noise due to environmental disturbances.
The laser beams from the two slave lasers are combined using an unpolarized beam splitter, and the resulting beam is coupled into a single-mode polarization-maintaining fiber. The beat note signal is detected using a fast photodiode and then amplified using a low-noise amplifier. The amplified signal is subsequently mixed with an RF signal that is generated using a commercial signal generator (E8257D, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) and filtered to obtain the error signal. In our case, the reference RF frequency signal is ∼9.192 631 770 GHz and is resonant with the hyperfine splitting of the Cs ground state. A commercial high-speed servo controller (LB1005, Newport Corporation, Irvine, CA) is then used to generate feedback to phase lock the optical beat note of the coherent laser to the reference source and ultimately to tune the driving frequency of the FEOM. Part of the beat note signal is coupled out to be monitored using a microwave spectrum analyzer.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The beat note signals that were measured using the microwave spectrum analyzer at different positions (position A and position B) in the different cases are shown in Fig. 2. The central frequency is 9.192 631 770 GHz, and the 3 dB linewidths of these curves, which are limited by the resolution of the spectrum analyzer, are all 1 Hz. As the figure shows, the beat note signal when the OPLL is on is lower than that when the OPLL is off, and the noise is reduced by up to 30 dB at the close offset frequencies. The spike at 50 Hz arises from the power-line. The origins of the spikes at 25, 35 Hz were not clearly determined yet, and they were reduced when the OPLL was on. In addition, the results measured at different positions when the OPLL was on were similar because the coherent laser beams were phase locked to the reference source.
To describe the beat note characteristics of the coherent lasers at different positions with or without the use of the OPLL more intuitively, the absolute phase noise spectral density (PSD) was also measured in each case using a signal source analyzer (E5052B, Agilent). For comparison, the phase noise of the reference source is also shown in Fig. 3. In curves (c) and (d), when the OPLL is switched on, both of the phases of the beat note are tightly locked to the reference signal. Over the range from 1 Hz to 40 Hz, the phase noise of the beat note is in good agreement with the reference signal, while the signals are almost the same over the range from 1 Hz to 3 kHz, which indicates the excellent performance of the OPLL. When compared with the results in curves (a) and (b) when the OPLL is switched off, the phase noise was reduced by 20–30 dB over the range from 40 Hz to 10 kHz. The phase noise spikes at 25 Hz, 35 Hz, 45 Hz, and 50 Hz were also reduced by 20–30 dB. Thus, we can see that the overall phase noise is reduced significantly. At position B when the OPLL is on, as shown in curve (d), the phase noise is −41, −81, −98, −83, and −95 dBrad^{2}/Hz at offset frequencies of 1 Hz, 100 Hz, 1 kHz, 10 kHz, and 1 MHz, respectively. The increase in the phase noise between 15 kHz and 1 MHz is caused by the bandwidth of the OPLL of 10 kHz. Additionally, in the range from 3 kHz to 1 MHz, a degradation of approximately 3 dB is observed between position A and position B, which may be caused by environmental disturbance. A similar degradation of approximately 3 dB is found between curves (a) and (b) in the range above 1 kHz; however, a degradation of more than 3 dB is observed in the low-frequency range in curve (b), which indicates that the phase coherence is degraded during the injection amplification process or possibly even before the amplification procedure. The performance of the phase noise floor can be improved with a higher system bandwidth.
To evaluate the phase fluctuations of the coherent bichromatic laser, we consider the situation at position B when the OPLL is on and when the OPLL is off. The residual phase noise can be determined by integrating the PSD spectrum of the beat note signal [20]. According to the spectra shown in Fig. 3, curve (b) with the OPLL off and curve (d) with the OPLL on, which were measured at position B, the residual phase noise values without and with the feedback system were calculated to be 0.12 rad^{2} and 0.0030 rad^{2}, respectively. Therefore, the feedback system reduced the residual phase noise by a magnitude of 40. This result for the hybrid scheme is comparable to the results produced by other schemes using OPLL methods [20,21]. Simultaneously, the output from the mixer was also recorded, and the corresponding phase fluctuations are presented in Fig. 4(a). The phase when the OPLL is switched off (black curve) drifts considerably over time when compared with the phase when the OPLL is switched on (red curve), which is limited to a 0.4 rad range. The Allan deviation of the phase fluctuation was also calculated, as shown in Fig. 4(b), to provide an estimate of the phase instability. The results of the Allan deviation for the fractional frequency stability indicate that the phase stability of the coherent bichromatic laser is improved significantly when the OPLL is used. The slope of the Allan deviation when the OPLL is on is 1/τ (where τ is the averaging time) because of the white phase modulation noise.
Additionally, when a phase-coherent laser is used rather than a microwave oscillator in our continuous cold atomic clock system, it is also necessary to consider the effects of the optical beat note of the phase-coherent laser on the atomic clock. In continuous-regime clocks, the local oscillator phase noise, which limits the short-frequency stability via the intermodulation effect, is given by [22,23]
where S_{φ}(2f_{m}) is the PSD of the LO phase fluctuations and S_{y}(2f_{m}) is the PSD of the related fractional frequency fluctuations; S_{y}(f)=(fν0){2}S_{φ}(f) is determined at the resonance frequency v_{0}, and the LO is modulated at frequency f_{m}. When we consider the PSD values in curves (b) and (d) of Fig. 3, which were measured at position B with the OPLL turned off and on, respectively, we can use Eq. (1) to obtain the short-term frequency stability values corresponding to the different values of the modulation frequency f_{m}, as shown in Fig. 5. The results show that the influence of the intermodulation effect on the Allan deviation when the OPLL is on is reduced by an order of magnitude compared with that measured without the OPLL because of the reduced optical beat note phase noise of the coherent laser. It is clear that the typical operating modulation frequency of the clock must be lower than 200 Hz to reduce the contribution of the intermodulation effect to the atomic clock to a factor of less than 10^{−12}. Assuming that f_{m} = 33 Hz, we have σ_{yLO}(τ)∼4.5×10^{−13}τ^{−1/2}, with S_{φ}(2f_{m}) = −84 dBrad^{2}/Hz; or at f_{m} = 83 Hz, we have σ_{yLO}(τ)∼6.0×10^{−13}τ^{−1/2}, with S_{φ}(2f_{m}) = −90 dBrad^{2}/Hz. This still represents a serious limitation on the frequency stability for clocks of orders better than 10^{−13}τ^{−1/2}, and it cannot be neglected when the clock is of the order of 10^{−12}τ^{−1/2}.
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a hybrid-type scheme for a coherent bichromatic laser system based on the use of optical injection and an OPLL. The absolute phase noise of the optical beat note of the laser has been reduced significantly to −81 dBrad^{2}/Hz, and reductions of 20–30 dB were observed in the low-frequency range. This noise can be reduced to the order of the intermodulation effect on a continuous atomic clock. The proposed method can be used to reduce the phase noise that is caused by air turbulence, mechanical vibrations of the optical components, or optical injection. Additionally, this design offers a convenient way to adjust the intensities and polarizations of two color lasers independently while ensuring that the two lasers remain coherent. This laser system can not only be applied in microwave atomic clocks based on the Raman–Ramsey technique but also be used in other phase-coherent atomic experiments.
FIG. 1. 
Schematic diagram of the hybrid-type scheme. The coherent bichromatic laser is obtained by an optical injection-locking process (dashed box), and an optical phase-locked loop is used to reduce the phase noise. ML: master laser; SL: slave laser; BS: beam splitter; M: mirror; λ/2: half-wave plate; PD: photodetector; A: amplifier; SA: spectrum analyzer; position A: location close to laser; position B: location far from laser. When the optical phase-locked loop (OPLL) is switched off, the dielectric resonator oscillator (DRO) is replaced with a reference source (E8257D, Agilent) that operates at a frequency of 9.192 631 770 GHz for measurement comparison. When the OPLL is switched on, the optical beat note is phase locked to the reference source.
FIG. 2. 
Beat note signals between the two slave lasers for the cases where the system is running freely and where the hybrid-type scheme is used in different positions (where position A is close to the laser system and position B is distant from the laser system) to detect the coherence of the lasers at a central frequency of 9.192 631 770 GHz. A spectrum analyzer was used to set the resolution bandwidth at 1 Hz, with signal averaging over ten scans.
FIG. 3. 
Measured values of absolute phase noise spectral density (PSD) under various operating conditions for offset frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 1 MHz at 9.192 631 770 GHz. (a) The system is running freely when the laser beams are combined and detected at position A and the OPLL is off. (b) The output of the hybrid-type scheme measured at position B when the OPLL is off. (c) The output of the hybrid-type scheme measured at position A when the OPLL is on. (d) The output of the hybrid-type scheme measured at position B when the OPLL is on. (e) The output from the reference source.
FIG. 4. 
(a) Phase error signal and (b) Allan deviation for time records measured at position B with the OPLL switched either on or off. The red curve in (b) has a slope of −1 due to white phase modulation noise.
FIG. 5. 
Estimated impact of the intermodulation effect on the short-term frequency stability of a continuous atomic clock at an integration time of 1 s for different modulation frequencies.
