Realization of a high vacuum evaporation system for wave-length shifter deposition on photo-detector windows
In this paper, the authors present a system based on a vacuum chamber and Knudsen cells that can evaporate organic materials on convex surfaces up to 10 in. diameter, with a good uniformity, in a very short time. This system was successfully used at CERN for the deposition of tetra-phenyl butadiene wavelength shifter on the 8 in. window of 360 Hamamatsu R5912-MOD photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), before their installation inside the ICARUS T600 detector to be used for neutrino physics studies. The quantum efficiency in the vacuum ultraviolet region measured on the whole photocathode shows a good uniformity over the entire PMT active surface with an average value above 10% from 120 to 200 nm.
I. INTRODUCTION
A number of innovative experiments dedicated to neutrino and rare-events physics are using liquefied noble-gases both as target and detector. These media have the remarkable property to efficiently produce scintillation photons after the passage of ionizing particles. Scintillation light, which is used for trigger and timing purposes, is emitted in the vacuum ultraviolet region (λ = 100–200 nm). To match the peak sensitivity of conventional photo-detectors in the visible region, it is necessary to shift the emitted wavelength by means of wavelength shifters (WLS). These materials must be deposited on detectors which are usually photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) with large and convex sensitive area. For this reason, an innovative evaporation system suitable to large and convex surfaces has been designed. This system was used at CERN for the deposition of tetra-phenyl butadiene (TPB) WLS on the 8 in. window of 360 Hamamatsu R5912-MOD PMTs before their installation inside ICARUS T600, which is a liquid argon (LAr) time projection chamber detector to be operated at Fermilab for neutrino physics studies [1].
II. LARGE AREA PHOTODETECTOR FOR RARE-EVENTS PHYSICS
In rare-events physics experiments, such as neutrino and dark matter searches, large area, high sensitivity photodetectors are used [2–4]. Commonly adopted devices are 8 in. PMTs, such as the Hamamatsu R5912-MOD or ETL 9357FLA, which are characterized by a high gain (G >10^{6} with 10–12 dynodes), a glass (borosilicate) convex window and a bialkali photocathode on a platinum under-layer to extend the range of operating temperature down to about −200 °C. Inside the ICARUS T600 detector, 360 PMTs Hamamatsu R5912-MOD are deployed to detect the scintillation light produced by liquid argon, which is emitted with a peak at λ = 128 nm. This PMT is shown in Fig. 1.
Unfortunately, the light emission of liquefied noble gases is in the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) range of the optical spectrum (centered at λ = 128 nm and λ = 175 nm for LAr and liquid xenon, respectively) out of the glass and quartz window transparency. To overcome this drawback, a WLS is commonly deposited on the PMT window. TPB is the most stable and effective compound able to convert the VUV to visible light, to match a bialkali (photocathode) sensitivity curve [5]. TPB is an organic material (C_{6}H_{5})_{2}C=CHCH=C(C_{6}H_{5})_{2} that absorbs light over a broad range from the VUV to UV with an emission peak at λ = 425 ± 50 nm. Its melting point is at 183 °C and its boiling point is at 210 °C in a high vacuum regime, allowing its deposition by evaporation. This procedure requires evaporation cells with very precise temperature regulation, such as Knudsen cell.
III. EVAPORATION SYSTEM
Considering the convex surface (instead of a flat one) on which the WLS must be deposited, a standard chamber simply made by an evaporation cell with the PMT over it, cannot guarantee a uniform deposition because of its shape, especially on the edges of the detector. For this reason, we decided to install a motorized rotating feedthrough on the top of a vacuum chamber, on which the PMT is mounted at an angle of 40° with respect to the cover. Below the PMT, a Knudsen cell is mounted. The PMT tilt angle and the distance from the Knudsen guarantee, considering the device rotation, a geometrical uniformity of the expected evaporation process between center and border of the windown surface. In Fig. 2, the complete system is shown.
Evaporation is carried out following a protocol that guarantees a high optical yield and uniformity. Even though the treatment can be performed on one device at a time, the procedure takes only 3 h. When the pressure inside the vacuum chamber is of the order of 10^{−6} mbar, the motor starts to rotate at 10 turns/min, and the temperature regulator is set to 220 °C. When the temperature reaches 190 °C, the shutter over the cell is opened, letting the material to reach the PMT by evaporation. During the evaporation, a “Sycon STM-100/MF Thickness/Rate Monitor” allows to monitor the process. It uses an oscillating quartz crystal as the sensor device. The crystal, located inside the chamber beside the PMT, is externally connected to a “Sycon OSC-100A Oscillator.” The monitor displays the deposition thickness value both per unit of time (Å/s) and integrated on the whole process (kÅ).
IV. EVAPORATION UNIFORMITY OVER THE PHOTOCATHODE SURFACE
The most important parameters of the evaporation process have been evaluated by evaporating TPB over a PMT mock-up, covered in part with small glass disks used as sample points. Figure 3 shows the mock-up, realized with a 3D printer, that can host up to 17 glasses, 1 in. diameter, along four orthogonal angles on a convex surface which emulates the photocathode window.
The uniformity of the evaporation over the entire convex photocathode is measured by weighting each glass, before and after the process, with a high precision scale. The TPB density as a function of different distances from the PMT window center is shown in Fig. 4 along the four mock-up arms, while the TPB density at different rotation angles at fixed radial distances from the center (5–20 cm) is presented in Fig. 5. It can be seen how the TPB density has a high degree of uniformity for a fixed distance, along the whole PMT circumference.
V. QUANTUM EFFICIENCY VUV MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
The optical characterization of the detector after the coating process was carried out by means of a VUV measurement system developed at the INFN Pavia (Italy). It allows the characterization of detectors in terms of absolute quantum efficiency (QE) in the VUV range of the optical spectrum. As it can be seen in Fig. 6, it consists of a vacuum chamber where light produced by a continuous deuterium lamp is separated by a MacPherson 234 monochromator and then directed alternatively toward a NIST calibrated reference photodiode or toward the device under test. A comparison between the current delivered from the two devices, measured alternatively with a Keithley PicoAmmeter and corrected by the photodiode QE given by NIST, provides the absolute QE of the device under test. Available wavelength ranges from 120 to 250 nm with a maximum resolution of 1 nm. The mounting of the device on a rotating feedthrough allows the measurements of the QE in various positions of the photocathode.
VI. RESULTS
A sample of 10 PMTs, out of the total set of the 360 units, were characterized in terms of quantum efficiency at λ = 128 nm and results are shown in Fig. 7. In Fig. 8, the distribution of the QE is also shown. The obtained values are distributed in the 10%–15% range, with an average value of 0.12 and a standard deviation of 0.01 on the distribution. This QE value is suitable for high energy physics experiments request, being almost the double of the QE of the 8 in. cryogenic PMTs already successfully adopted in the ICARUS T600 detector in its operation at the Gran Sasso underground laboratory of INFN (Italy) [6,7]. Fluctuations are mainly due to different sensitivity of the bialkali photocathode on different devices.
The optical uniformity of the quantum efficiency as function of the position on photocathode window is, for each PMT, ±5% around the mean value. An example of QE variation as a function of the radial distance from the center is shown in Fig. 9, where data are compared to the radial dependence variation for visible light of the cathode in the absence of coating obtained with a laser at 405 nm [8]. Results obtained with the TPB coating fairly reproduce the photocathode behavior for visible light, demonstrating the good uniformity of the TPB deposit in terms of light yield conversion.
The behavior of the photodetector sensitivity as function of the wavelength in the VUV range is shown in Fig. 10: the QE shows a good uniformiy along all the VUV range.
VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The presented evaporation system guarantees a uniform evaporation of TPB wavelength shifter over a convex 8 in. PMT photocathode window, granting a good quantum efficiency even at the photocathode edge. The obtained values, with a 12% mean QE, are suitable for high energy physics experiments request and allow to use the VUV scintillation light for trigger and timing purposes. The adopted technique permitted to perform deposition in a short time allowing the treatment of the whole 360 PMT of the ICARUS detector in around 120 working days.
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) Picture and technical drawing of the Hamamatsu R5912-MOD PMT. Dimension units are millimeters.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Schematic description of the evaporation system.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) Three dimensional drawing of the PMT mock-up.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) TPB density as a function of the radial distance from the center along the four mock-up arms: the resulting surface density (left axis) and the fraction of the total material inserted inside the crucible (right axis) are shown.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) TPB density as a function of the mock-up rotation angle for different radial distances from the center, showing a good uniformity along the PMT circumference.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) Schematic description of VUV measurement system.
Fig. 7. 
Quantum efficiency values for different PMT serial numbers.
Fig. 8. 
Distribution of the quantum efficiency over the tested PMTs.
Fig. 9. 
Uniformity of the quantum efficiency as function of the radial distance from the cathode center. Data measured with 128 nm light on the coated photocathode (black dots) are compared to the radial dependence variation of the bare photocathode for visible light (white dots), demonstrating the good uniformity of the TPB deposit in terms of light yield conversion.
Fig. 10. 
Photodetector sensitivity as a function of wavelength in the VUV range.
