DC glow microdischarge with a self-determined length in helium and argon at atmospheric pressure
The spatial characteristics of a stable DC glow microdischarge with currents of 1–20 mA ignited between a flat cathode and truncated cylindrical anode with a diameter of 100 μm in helium and argon at atmospheric pressure were studied. The focus of the present study is on the examination of the experimental conditions to obtain a stable and homogeneous state of the microdischarge at an electrode gap of 15–1500 μm. It is shown that such conditions are fulfilled when the parameter pL_{0} (p—gas pressure at 300 K; L_{0}—electrode gap) corresponds to the values near the minimum of the Paschen curve, and the microdischarge choses its length, that is the microdischarge has a self-determined length. The main measured parameters are the voltage drops across the electrode gap and the discharge currents. In addition, the size and shape of the negative glow region of the discharge, cathode current density, and other characteristics were estimated.
I. INTRODUCTION
The scientific and practical interest in the discharges of high (atmospheric) pressure is largely motivated by the lack of requirement of expensive vacuum equipment. But, in comparison with different types of low-pressure gas discharges which can burn steadily in large spaces [1–5], providing a stable operation of atmospheric pressure discharges has some troubles. With the increase in pressure, the uniformity of gas discharges is deteriorating, and their sharply inhomogeneous and non-stationary states appear as a result of various plasma instabilities [6,7].
At the same time, in recent years, there has been considerable interest in homogeneous low-current (without transition into an arc or spark) non-isothermal glow microdischarges at atmospheric pressure under conditions where the neutral gas heating is negligible and most of the input energy is consumed during excitation and ionization of the plasma neutral particles [8–11]. Despite the practical importance, the issues associated with self-organization of the homogeneous gas discharge at intermediate and high pressures are still far from being solved.
One of the main reasons for this situation is that, due to the local field approximation, which is valid at high pressures, the electron distribution function (EDF) tail and (as a consequence) the rates of ionization are tightly coupled with the local electric field, which heats the electronic component [12]. Thus, any mechanism resulting in an increase in the electrical field in the plasma compression areas leads to the rise of ionization rate, which in turn results in ionization instability of the plasma. As a result of the development of ionization instability, sharply non-uniform plasma density profiles are formed. Non-uniform Joule heating of the neutral gas and the Maxwellization of the EDF tail that occurs due to inter-electron collisions is considered as the main mechanism of the formation of non-uniform plasma density profiles [7,12].
Moreover, ignition of extended discharges [10,13], which have a breakdown point on the right-hand branch of the Paschen curve, is unavoidably accompanied by appearance of an autonomous self-sustaining plasma bridge—a positive column (PC). As a result of numerous studies (see, e.g., Ref [7]), it was found that, in the case of the predominant role of volume processes of charges loss, the current-voltage characteristic (CVC) of PC decreases so that the development of instability (especially, thermal instability) leads to a disruption of a stable discharge state. Therefore, to obtain a stable discharge at high pressures under the conditions prescribed by the right-hand branch of the Paschen curve without the use of special techniques (such as gas flow, arrangement of the plasma cathode with an auxiliary discharge, and the change of a stationary power supply with a pulsed one) is difficult and often impossible.
Thus, a stable homogeneous high-pressure discharge can be initiated at the values of the pL_{0} parameter that correspond to the conditions near the minimum of the Paschen curve when a definite positive column is not formed. In this case, an increasing CVC provides a stable burning of the discharge [14,15].
To check this statement in practice, a discharge between a flat cathode and a point anode was used in Ref [16]. The distance between the cathode and the tip of the needle, L_{0}, was chosen to be less than the distance corresponding to the minimum of the Paschen curve L_{min} to ensure that the breakdown of gas and fixation of the discharge to the anode corresponded to the conditions near the minimum of the Paschen curve (U = U_{min}, L = L_{min}). In other words, the spot of the discharge fixation is located above the tip of the anode at a distance L_{0} < L_{min} (Fig. 1).
Experiments with atmospheric air [16] have shown that such discharge “chooses” its length close to L_{min} itself to burn steadily, or it has a self-determined length. The voltage drop across the discharge gap is equal to the magnitude of the order of U_{min}, which weakly depends on the distance between electrodes and the gas pressure. In practice, these conditions are realized for discharges without significant thermal emission due to the heating of the cathode and the transition to the arc. A discharge at high discharge current can be implemented by the change of a DC mode of a power supply to a pulse-periodic or single-pulse mode.
This study is a continuation of the study of Ref [16]. The experimental approach to obtain a stable DC microdischarge at atmospheric pressure with a self-determined length between a flat cathode and truncated cylindrical anode was used for helium and argon. The corresponding CVC was recorded and analyzed.
II. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experimental setup and measurements
To investigate the spatial structure and the electrical characteristics of microdischarges, an experimental setup was developed and assembled (Fig. 2). The setup consists of a flat steel cathode with a diameter of 10 mm (1) and a cylindrical molybdenum anode with a diameter of 100 μm (2) fixed vertically onto a movable lever (3).
The tip of the cylindrical anode was truncated so that it had a flat top with slightly rounded edges 15–20 μm in width. Molybdenum is used as the anode due to its high melting point (approximately 2600 °C) and a low coefficient of linear thermal expansion (approximately 5.5 × 10^{−6 }K^{−1}). A steel cathode is used because of its capability to be easily polished.
The lever (3) allows changing the electrode gap from 0.005 to 1.5 mm by means of an adjusting screw (4). A discharge cell was placed into a 0.2 l leak-proof chamber that was filled with gas at atmospheric pressure.
To supply the discharge, we used a regulated constant voltage source (5) GW Instek GPR-100H05D (0–1000 V) that was connected to the discharge cell via a ballast resistor 30 kΩ (6). The discharge currents and voltages were recorded by means of two Fluke 289 multimeters (7, 8). In addition, to monitor fast-changing processes, the same values were recorded using an oscilloscope Tektronix TDS2024C with a current shunt 20 Ω (9) and voltage divider 100:1 (10). The difference between the data recorded by the multimeters and the oscilloscope was insignificant in comparison with the background of random variations in the discharge current and voltage that are linked with the heating of the gas.
The magnitudes of random changes in the discharge currents and voltages lasting from several microseconds to tens of milliseconds were less than 1% of their constant values. These changes against the background of slow (tens of seconds) thermal fluctuations can be considered insignificant.
A discharge with a current of 1–20 mA was ignited only after a few minutes of gas passing through the chamber at the velocity of 5 l/min. The surface evenness of the cathode and the curving of the anode were controlled with a microscope. The cathode surface was polished if irregularities appeared under a long duration of the discharge igniting. Polishing of the cathode was performed by hand with a characteristic granularity of no more than 0.4 μm.
The measurements of the electrical characteristics of the discharge and its image recording were implemented in the quasi-stationary mode, that is, by means of soft hand regulating voltage of the supply and changing the electrode gap. Note that such a measurement technique showed a significant gas heating at long periods of the discharge exploitation, in particular, for argon discharges with high currents. In fact, this can be revealed by a hysteresis of voltage drop across a discharge gap (not higher than 3 V) in a series of measurements. More significant voltage drops across the discharge gap (up to 15 V) occur at continuous exploitations of the discharge cell at high discharge currents and after its handling (polishing the cathode surface). Note that the discharge characteristics in helium depended little on the shape of the anode tip for gaps wider than 50 μm.
Below are the results for two values of the discharge current (1.2 and 3.8 mA for helium and 0.8 and 0.4 mA for argon). The choice of such currents is made by the convenience of recording and measurement. In the pictures, for better clarity, contour lines are drawn along the cylindrical anode and flat cathode (one can observe the mirror reflection below the latter line).
B. Microdischarge in helium
After breakdown of the discharge gap, a discharge is formed, the characteristics of which depend on the discharge current. Figure 3 shows a discharge in helium for different electrode gaps.
At discharge gaps less than a certain value (approximately 100–120 μm), a pattern is observed of discharge that is largely similar to the one described in Ref [16] for microdischarge in air; the discharge chooses the length itself corresponding to the optimal burning conditions near the minimum of the Paschen curve and exists above the tip of the anode. The negative glow area appears to be pressed by the anode tip (three first images in Fig. 3 show such a situation).
This stage corresponds to the region (approximately 100–250 μm) of weak dependence of voltage on discharge in helium from the distance between the electrodes (Fig. 4). Near L_{0} ∼ 50 μm for the curves in Fig. 4, there is a sharp decline in voltage (approximately 15 V from the initial value) that is systematic (not random) in appearance. The appearance of this decline may be associated with S-shaped Paschen curves for a discharge in helium at low values of pL_{0}^{7}. The CVC of the discharge for length of 50 μm rises to currents of 15–20 mA (see Fig. 5).
The experiments show that changes in the discharge current result in almost proportional changes in the luminous area of the region corresponding to the normal glow discharge realized with a constant density of the cathode current [5]. According to the glow area size, we can make a rough estimate of the current density in the cathode region of the discharge.
Because the current increased from 1.5 to 18 mA, the cathode spot (Fig. 6) increased from 330 to 1140 μm; these data provide an estimate of the changes in the current density at the cathode in the range from 2.8 to 3.0 μA/(Torr^{2} cm^{2}). These values are in good agreement with the published data [7,17]. The discrepancies can be explained by the heating of the gas and the possible asymmetrical shape of the cathode spot.
With a further increase in the distance between the anode and cathode (L_{0} > 250 μm), the Faraday dark space and the positive column are formed. Because of the nature of the decreasing CVC of the positive column (Fig. 5), this situation corresponds to the voltage dependence curves for currents of 3.8 and 1.2 mA intercrossing at L_{0} ≈ 300 μm (Fig. 4). The field strength in the positive column is approximately constant and decreases with increasing discharge current (corresponding to the stage of linear voltage growth curves in Fig. 4).
Note that the discharge in helium, unlike the discharges in air and in argon, has an uncontracted positive column and features sustainable burning until the discharge gap reaches L_{0} ∼ 3 mm. It is known that atmospheric discharge in helium is homogeneous and stable up to the millimeter (or more) sizes (see, e.g., Ref [17]). In the literature, the reasons for the stability of the discharge in helium are associated with the two main characteristics of helium in comparison with other gases: the high thermal conductivity of lightweight helium and the closeness of the high-pressure EDF to a Maxwellian distribution when the electron energy balance is dominated by elastic losses. Both of these factors contribute to inhibiting the development of instabilities.
C. Microdischarge in argon
Figure 7 is a photograph of the discharge in argon for lengths of 10–200 μm and a current of 0.8 mA. The experiments show that the nature of the discharge in argon at atmospheric pressure is very different from the nature of the discharge in helium.
The discharge in argon is stable only at currents less than 1 mA, and the current-voltage characteristic with positive slope holds only for L_{0} < 20–25 μm and currents less than 1.5 mA (Fig. 8). For L_{0}< 20–30 μm, the discharge voltage changes slightly (Fig. 9). For short lengths (at least 20–30 μm), the discharge behavior (Figs. 7 and 10) generally repeats as in helium and air [9]. However, if the discharge in helium is stable, even in the presence of a very long positive column, we can obtain a stable discharge in argon due to the effect of self-determination of discharge for small L_{0}, as described above. In contrast to the discharge in helium, argon discharge at currents greater than 1 mA is very unstable. The cathode spot is constantly moving along the plane of the cathode and changes its shape during the discharge. In addition, such a discharge attachment to the cylindrical anode is constantly moving along the anode, is located above the edges, and features the presence of a long positive column. The positive column region, in contrast to the case considered above for the discharge in helium, is more contracted and not “separated” from the negative glow, with a prominent Faraday dark space.
The above results are in good agreement with the data presented in Ref [17] for long (1 to 10 mm) discharges in helium and argon. In addition to the general qualitative results of the studied regimes, there are some of the same quantitative ones. Thus, the field strength of the discharge PC in helium for the discharge current of 3.8 mA (Fig. 4) is equal to 60 V/mm, in good agreement with the values obtained in Ref [17] (see Fig. 7 at 3 mA). The cathode discharge voltage drop in argon as well as that in Ref [17] was found to be 190 V, which is well above the normal voltage drop according to Ref [5] (165 V for a steel cathode and 130 V for a copper cathode, as used in Ref [17]). A similar value for the discharge in helium is also virtually identical to the value from Ref [17], that is, 155 V and 145 V in Ref [17], and the normal cathode discharge voltage drop in helium from Ref [5] is approximately 150 V for a steel cathode and 170 V for a copper cathode. Note that an approximately matching CVC was found in the discharge in helium for a 1 mm gap in the current range of 1 to 20 mA (curve 4 in Fig. 5 and Fig. 5 from Ref [17]).
III. CONCLUSION
A discharge with a self-determined length which has the structure and main parameters close to a well-researched glow discharge has been presented. During the conducted experiments, self-determination of the discharge length between the flat cathode and the truncated cylindrical anode in helium and argon was obtained using the method presented in Ref [16]. The obtained discharge has the ability to choose its own length near the minimum of the Paschen curve, and it is possible to realize a stable homogeneous microdischarge at atmospheric pressure. An increase in the length of the discharge gap in argon was found to lead to unstable and non-uniform microdischarge. Whereas, microdischarge in helium remains stable at the whole range of given electrode gaps, even when a pronounced positive column can be seen and the discharge CVC decreases.
FIG. 1. 
On the nature of discharge with a self-determined length (L_{0}—inter-electrode gap; L_{min}—the value corresponding to the minimum of the Paschen curve).
FIG. 2. 
The experimental setup (1—flat cathode; 2—truncated cylindrical anode; 3—movable lever, 4—adjusting screw, 5—power supply, 6—ballast resistor, 7—voltmeter, 8—amperemeter, 9—current shunt, 10—resistive divider).
FIG. 3. 
Discharge in helium at the current of 1.2 mA and varying electrode gap.
FIG. 4. 
Dependence of the discharge voltage on the gap value in helium at currents of 1.2 and 3.8 mA.
FIG. 5. 
CVC of discharges in helium for different electrode gaps: 1—50 μm; 2—200 μm; 3—500 μm; 4—1000 μm; 5—1500 μm.
FIG. 6. 
Dynamics of the microdischarge in helium with the change of current from 1.5 to 18 mA at the electrode gap of 50 μm.
FIG. 7. 
The discharge in argon at a current of 0.8 mA and varying electrode gap.
FIG. 8. 
CVC of the discharge in argon for the magnitude of the discharge gap of 15 μm.
FIG. 9. 
Dependence of the discharge voltage on the discharge gap in argon at currents of 0.4 and 0.8 mA.
FIG. 10. 
Dynamics of microdischarge in argon with decreasing current from 1.1 to 0.3 mA and at the electrode gap of 15 μm.
