Performance of the fiber-optic low-coherent ground settlement sensor: From lab to field
A fiber-optic low-coherent interferometry sensor was developed to measure the ground settlement (GS) in an accuracy of the micrometer. The sensor combined optical techniques with liquid-contained chambers that were hydraulically connected together at the bottom by using a water-filled tube. The liquid surface inside each chamber was at the same level initially. The optical interferometry was employed to read out the liquid level changes, which following the GS happened at the place where the chamber was put on and, thereby, the GS information was calculated. The laboratory effort had demonstrated its potential in the practical application. Here, the denoising algorithms on the measurement signal were carried out based on the specific environment to ensure the accuracy and stability of the system in field applications. After that, we extended this technique to the high-speed railway. The 5-days continuous measurement proved that the designed system could be applied to monitor the GS of the high-speed railway piers and approached an accuracy of ±70 μm in the field situation with a reference compensation sensor. So the performance of the sensor was suitable to the GS monitoring problem in the high-speed railway. There, the difficulties were to meet the monitoring requirement of both a large span in space and its quite tiny and slow changes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The scanning fiber-optic low-coherent Michelson interferometry (SLMI) was well developed to measure the displacement, thickness, etc., and a good review was presented in the year 2004 [1]. Based on these achievements, we designed a sensor for monitoring the bridge ground settlement (GS) [2,3], which was the first factor to cause the irregularity of the steel track of the high-speed railway. Comparing with the electrical and mechanical [4] methods, optical technique [5–7] has the advantages to carry out a remote monitoring, and it just meets some requirements of the high-speed railway monitoring.
The SLMI was one of the optical configurations to meet the requirement of the GS monitoring. Comparing with the other optical methods, such as self-mixing interferometry sensors [8], Fabry-Perot cavity sensors [9,10], Mach–Zehnder interferometers [11], light-leaking optical fiber liquid level sensors [12,13], Brillouin Optical Time-Domain Analysis (BOTDA) [14,15], and fiber grating sensors (FBG) [16–19], etc., the SLMI system was a direct measurement and with a greater measuring range. In principle, most of BOTDA and some FBG sensors measured the strain [16] or some deformation caused by the GS and readout in terms of a good calibration, which were of indirect measurement. Meanwhile, there were also some liquid level measurement studies based on FBG sensors [18,19] with high precision, but the range was usually not more than 30 mm. On the other hand, there is still much room for improvement to direct measurement methods based on liquid level measurement with regard to accuracy and stability.
In our design, we combined the SLMI system with the liquid-contained chambers, which was hydraulically connected together at the bottom by using a water-filled tube. The liquid surface inside each chamber is at the same level initially. Therefore, a GS monitoring, in practice, becomes a liquid level measurement. The accuracy was better than 10 μm, and the 24-h stability in lab achieves to ±20 μm. And the ultrasonic level meter [20] was all developed based on this way.
Here, we studied the performance of the SLMI system in order to check its possibility to be used in the practical monitoring. The study was carried out in both the civil engineering lab and a real high-speed railway monitoring. The fine optical study on its tilt performance was given and presented that the designed GS sensor was working well within a ±5° tilt [21].
First, we did an experiment to simulate the GS on a model of the bridge in the civil engineering lab by loading weights on the pier tops. We mounted both the GS sensors and dial gauges on the bridge, in order to observe their temperature properties and to verify the results. And then, some studies on denoising of measurement signal were carried out, which ensured the accuracy and stability of the system in the field environment. Next, the GS sensors were assembled on practical high-speed railway bridges to monitor if there were GS occurred during the four months’ time span. A comparison was made between GS sensors and a commercialized multistation. The results showed that the data of GS sensors are stable, which could be a potential practical method.
II. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE GS SENSOR
The GS sensors were designed based on the SLMI as shown in Fig. 1. It consists of liquid-contained chambers and sensor probes connected by the optical fiber. Two GS sensors were shown on a scale bridge model to monitor the settlement. And two dial gauges were installed for verification.
The optical principles of the system, which had been described in Ref [21], could be summarized as follows: the SLMI was configured in the Michelson interferometer. One of the paths of the interferometer was formed by the liquid surface, and the readout of the interferometer could make the measurement of the surface approach micrometer scale. The liquid-contained chambers were hydraulically connected together at the bottom using a water-filled tube. The liquid surface inside each chamber was at the same level initially. One of the vessels was located on the stable ground or was at a point that can be surveyed too. The others were located at the points where GS or heave was to be measured. Differential GS, or heave, between the vessels, will result in an apparent rise or fall of the liquid level, which biased the initial equal status. The liquid level in the chamber could be measured by using the SLMI system.
The readout unit of the designed sensor was shown in Fig. 2. Where D, which was highlighted by the bright blue color, represented the difference in the heights of the balanced water surfaces between the initial and post-GS happened.
On the other hand, we could set up a relationship based on the total water mass conservation. We defined the liquid level changes as Δh=h_{1}−h_{2} and employed to measure the GS directly. Based on this measured Δh and Eq. (4) given in Ref [21], we can get a GS readout formula as
where the H_{m} represented the measurand magnitude of GS, which was generated by the applied H, shown in Fig. 2. S_{1} and S_{2} are corresponding to the water surface areas of the tank and the GS sensor chamber, respectively. In our design, they were 43.0 cm^{2} and 600.0 cm^{2}, respectively.
However, it is difficult to obtain an absolutely stable reference point in some instances. Here, a principle of relative settlement measurement by the SLMI system was presented.
As shown in Fig. 3, we supposed the chambers were on the same level as the height of 0 at the initial time, and the liquid level was H. For convenient calculation, we defined height changes d as positive for increase and negative for decrease. When the reference point was changed, with d_{1}, and two sensor chambers’ height changed with d_{2} and d_{3}, we could give the formula to calculate the new liquid level H′ as below
where S_{1} and S_{2}, S_{3} correspond to the water surface areas of the tank and the GS sensor chambers, respectively.
The initial readout of the GS sensors, K, could be expressed as
L was the distance from the sensor probe to the bottom of the chamber. When settlement happened, the read out of GS sensors K′ changed as
Thus the relative settlement could be expressed as
Actually, the reference information was eliminated as well. So this algorithm was applied to measure the relative settlement in Secs. III and V.
III. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE GS SENSORS IN THE LAB
A. Static test
The experiment was implemented on a scale model bridge as shown in Fig. 4. Two sensors were placed on the left and right top of piers, respectively, in order to detect the settlement of the bridge. Meanwhile, two dial gauges were installed and tightly in contact to the bottom of the bridge deck at the very near location for verification purpose. The tank was put on a shelf, which stand by the bridge deck.
In the laboratory environment, we first tested the temperature properties for 48 h without loading applied. The results were shown in Fig. 5. The GS sensors exhibited a similar tendency as the dial gauges when they were both suffering the same temperature fluctuations. However, the fluctuations of the GS sensors demonstrated about 4-times magnitude more sensitive than that given by the dial gauges, which were indicated by the different scales in the Y-axis. Fortunately, we can reduce this fluctuation by introducing a reference GS sensor. And the compensated data were presented as the red dotted curve in Fig. 5. We can observe that the red compensated curve and the blue dial gauges’ curve are close both in tendency and magnitude.
B. Dynamic test
The GS sensors were employed to response the change of the loading state on the model bridge, and thereby to simulate the settlement situation. The load was applied by a moving carrier, about 400 kg in weight, as shown in Fig. 6.
We chose three states, no-load (N), left-load (L), and right-load (R), respectively, to generate a tiny repeatable settlement. Because that the model bridge is a continuous girder bridge, the load applied on the top of one pier will cause a different settlement in the places of the two piers. We collected the data in every 5 min underlying the different loading states. We recorded five points at each loading state. The responses were shown in Fig. 7.
Figures 7(a) and 7(b) showed the results measured by dial gauges and Figs. 7(c) and 7(d) were obtained using the GS-sensors underlying the same loading states. We found that Figs. 7(a) and 7(c) were in close tendency and the same as Fig. 7(c) with Fig. 7(d). Especially, the tendency presented in Figs. 7(c) and 7(d) was opposite, and this reflected the correlation between the GS sensors located at the left pier and the right. However, these correlation properties inherent in the continuous beam could not be observed by the dial gauges, as presented in Figs. 7(a) and 7(b). The reason is that, when settlement occurred, the dial gauges were compressed at the specific fixed point, unlike the average results obtained by the GS-sensors. Anyway, the relative settlements by taking a difference between the left sensors and the right located nearby the two piers were close as given in Fig. 7(e). Where, the interference from the temperature fluctuations would be eliminated as well. To make the results clear, the curves of the GS sensors were represented as “L − R” (data from the left sensor subtracted that from the right).
In order to test the durability of the GS sensors, we measured the settlement by GS sensors and the dial gauges simultaneously on the bridge underlying the different loading states no-load, right-load, left-load, and no-load again for a longer period. Each state lasted for 48 h and the data were collected once half an hour as well. The data measured by GS sensors were obtained automatically and those of dial gauges were recorded by a timer shooting. The comparison was presented in Fig. 8.
In Fig. 8, the instant long-term relative settlement monitoring results between the left pier and the right using both GS sensors and dial gauges underlying the same loading states were given. The dial gauges presented a fluctuation varied from −10 μm to 20 μm. However, the GS-sensors varied from −50 μm to 100 μm. In order to make the results more clear, we averaged the results in each loading state which were shown in Fig. 8 in a light color. We can found that the compatible results between the two methods. These long-term test results established our confidence and ambitions to make a practical approach. Because of the mileage extension of the high-speed railway, monitoring of the GS was indeed a difficult work. One reason is from its large space span, usually thousands of kilometers; the other is from its inherent slow and tiny changes. Thus, an instrument that could combine the high accuracy with a long-term stability was required.
IV. DENOISING OF SIGNALS
In field measurements, the system must suffer the noises, which affect the results of measurement directly. So how to suppress the noise effectively and improve the signal to noise ratio becomes the kernel part and usually, and there is no explicit theory that can be traced. We analyzed that noises with regard to the SLMI system are mainly from two aspects, the amplitude noise and phase noise. The amplitude noise was generated from the intensity fluctuation of the light source, random losses of the communication fiber, and the dark current or shot noise of the photodetectors, etc. On the other hand, the low coherent light interferometry occurs when the optical path difference equals zero, so the uncertainty of the reflecting mirror caused by both the uneven moving velocity of the stepping motor and the vibration introduced by the high-speed railway pass through. These factors were added to the SLMI as a phase noise and thereby affected the inherent interference fringes. Even if an anti-tilt sensor was developed in Ref [21] to reduce the amplitude noises, it played no roles in this phase instability.
In this section, we proposed a phase noise suppressing method and proved effective in most cases of the scanning motor based field applications.
The basic idea was to suppress the noise by using a bandpass filter. The cut-off frequencies of the filter were chosen based on the scanning motor motion parameters because the motion part was much more sensitive to the environment vibration.
The output of a two-beam interferometer, like the SLMI system, can be described as
where λ indicates the wavelength of the light source; I_{1}(λ) and I_{2}(λ) represent the intensity of the reference light and sensing light, respectively; δ is the phase difference between reference light and sensing light; ΔL is the optical path difference; and ΔL_{0} is the initial optical path difference, where t = 0, v is the velocity of the stepping motor moving, which was set to 0.008 m/s.
So we can derive the frequency of the signal introduced by the motor moving with the speed v,
In the SLMI system, a low coherent light source, Super Luminescent Emitting Diodes (SLED), with a central wavelength at λ ∼ 1310 ± 45 nm was employed. Then, the frequency range of the measurement signal is between 11.808 kHz and 12.648 kHz, which was calculated based on Eq. (7). Thus, we chose 10 kHz to 14 kHz as the cut-off frequency of the bandpass filter, which could cover the band from 11.808 kHz to 12.648 kHz, and thereby could filter out the influence of other frequency components in the fringes.
Figure 9(a) showed that an interference fringe has emerged in the noise, and after a bandpass filtering, as given above, the results were shown in Fig. 9(b). We can find the effectiveness of the filtering algorithm.
From Fig. 9, we can find that a weak signal was extracted from the noises, which is conductive to judge the location of the signal peak. The design of the band passes filter improves the signal noise ratio of the measurement signal apparently and makes a promise on a stable and reliable system in the field environment.
V. PRACTICAL APPLICATION
We monitored the GS of a section high-speed railway bridge near Hefei, on the line from Beijing to Fuzhou. The basic requirement for monitoring the GS of the three piers was described in Fig. 10. The distance span between the two piers was 30 m. The system realized the functions of 4G wireless data transmission and remote restart when suffering a sudden turn-off of the power supply.
The sensor arrangement was shown in Fig. 11. There were three measuring points in the experiments: S_{A}, S_{B}, and S_{C}, which were, respectively, placed on the top of the three piers. Meanwhile, a multistation (Leica Nova MS50) from Leica Company was employed to monitor the GS of the bridge. Two reflecting prisms were stuck on each pier for the multistation. The picture of the monitored bridge was presented in Fig. 12(a). The three GS-sensors were mounted inside the girder at the places of the monitoring points assigned by the engineers as shown in Fig. 12(b).
The settlement data were acquired by the GS sensors hourly for five days, as shown in Fig. 13. And the multistation measured once a day in these days. The overall fluctuations in the GS curves were ascribed to the environmental temperature changes in day and night. And there, the downward trend of the data was correlated with the getting cold weather well.
When pier A is considered as a reference sensor, the GS of pier B and pier C relative to pier A can be calculated. The results comparing the GS sensors were shown in Fig. 14 with a comparison with the results from the multistation. In it, the subtraction S_{B} − S_{A} and S_{C} − S_{A} represented the relative settlement of S_{B} and S_{C}–S_{A}. T_{B} and T_{C} indicated the measurement made by a multistation at the location of pier B and pier C.
With the use of a 20-orders polynomial fitting of the results given in Fig. 14, and considering a three-times of its standard deviation, ±3σ, as its error limits, we found that the accuracy of the relative GS of piers was within ±70 μm. This was better than the ±0.5 mm provided by the Leica multistation, which was consistent with the measurement of multistation.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Monitoring of the slow and tiny changes of GS
To monitoring the quite slow and tiny changes of GS in the high-speed railway, a more precision automatic GS sensor was required. The designed GS sensor was proved feasible in the preliminary practical test. That is to say, the liquid surface in the sensing chamber could be used to measure the liquid level in the high-speed railway environment, even if it was acting as one of the reflection mirrors in the Michelson interferometer. So, there was no concern from the vibration of the liquid surface. However, the same water chamber used in the market product was provided by Geokon Co. There, they analyzed the liquid level using a precision vibration wire. Thus, this design could approach the optical accuracy in the practical monitoring and this could meet the requirement of the high accuracy of the GS in the high-speed railway.
B. Monitoring of the GS in a large span
The basic merit of this sensor was that this design provided a scheme to monitor a relative GS and needed not to deal with the standard reference point. This became very practical and could satisfy many practical requirements. It was this merit that made a water pipe working in a limited range, and thereby, we could share many GS sensing chambers with one SLMI analyzer system as shown in Fig. 15. This was because that the optical fiber is able to reach a far measuring point easily; therefore, the large span problems, especially from the length limitation of water pipe, are possibly being overcome.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we extended the designed GS system from lab to a practical approach, in order to try the practical requirement of the monitoring of the GS in the long mileage of the high-speed railway with slow and tiny changes. The experiments on a scale model of the bridge with the GS sensors demonstrated its possibility. The large requirement in span is to be monitored, usually thousands of kilometers, and the tiny changes of GS guided this work. An instrument that could combine the high accuracy with a long-term stability and automatic operation was required.
Here, we presented 5-day continuous practical monitoring results using a fiber-optic low-coherent interferometry. The designed GS system could be applied in the practical high-speed railway environment and an accuracy of ±70 μm for GS monitoring was approached with a reference compensation sensor.
FIG. 1. 
The frame diagram of the GS monitor system. 1: GS sensor; 2: dial gauge; 3: tank; 4: SLMI system.
FIG. 2. 
The readout of the GS sensor.
FIG. 3. 
The schematic of relative settlement measurement.
FIG. 4. 
The diagram of the experimental device.
FIG. 5. 
48-h temperature characteristic of the GS sensors (black), compensated GS sensors (red), and readout from the dial gauge (blue).
FIG. 6. 
The load carrier was applied to the model of the bridge.
FIG. 7. 
The pier settlement measured by GS sensors with verification of dial gauges underlying different loading states. Left pier settlement measured by (a) the dial gauge and (c) the GS sensors; right pier settlement measured by (b) the dial gauge and (d) the GS sensors. (e) The relative settlement was obtained by taking a difference between the left pier reading and the right using two methods, respectively. The letters in the figure stand for N: no-load, L: left-load, R: right load.
FIG. 8. 
Long-term measurement of the settlement of the bridge by GS sensors and dial gauges.
FIG. 9. 
The performance of the band passes filter. (a) Original signal embedded in a strong noise; (b) the signal after filtering.
FIG. 10. 
The relative positions of the three piers to be monitored.
FIG. 11. 
The diagram of the reflecting prisms for Leica multistation and the locations of the S_{A}, S_{B}, and S_{C} GS sensors.
FIG. 12. 
The picture view of the on-site installation of the GS sensors. (a) The picture view of the bridge to be monitored; (b) the installation of the GS sensor inside the girder.
FIG. 13. 
The settlement measured by GS sensors of S_{A}, S_{B}, and S_{C}.
FIG. 14. 
The relative settlement of the bridge measured by GS sensors and multistation.
FIG. 15. 
The scheme for sharing many GS sensing chambers with one SLMI system.
