Universal sensor based on the spectroscopy of glow discharge for the detection of traces of atoms or molecules in air
A sensitive and versatile sensor for the detection of traces of atoms or molecules in air based on the emission spectroscopy of glow discharge in air has been developed and studied. The advantages of this sensor compared to other well-known methods are that it renders the use of ultrahigh vacuum or cryogenic temperatures superfluous. The sensor is insensitive to the presence of water vapor (for example, in exhaled air) because of the absence of strong water lines in the visible spectral range. It has a high spectral selectivity limited only by Doppler broadening of the emission lines. The high selectivity of the sensor combined with a wide spectral range allows the detection of many toxic impurities, which can be present in air. Moreover, the spectral range used covers almost all biomarkers in exhaled air, making the proposed sensor extremely interesting for medical applications. To our knowledge, the proposed method is the first based on a glow discharge in air.
INTRODUCTION
Measuring systems for determining the qualitative and quantitative concentration of traces of atoms and molecules in the air are important to a wide range of human activities. The study of the composition of the air is relevant to very diverse fields of activity, for example, in ecology and environmental protection: the monitoring and control of atmospheric pollution that is a by-product of industry. Often, some chemical-technological processes associated with the use or production of gases need to be controlled during the production process. Other socially significant ecological tasks for which the intensive development of gas detection and detection facilities are required include public safety, forensics, and medicine. Moreover, it is essential to detecting explosive or other dangerous substances in places with large concentrations of people (railway stations and airports) in time [1–3].
In medicine, the development of a variety of methods for studying the composition of exhaled air is necessary. It is a known fact that a person’s normal exhalation is a complex mixture of some 600 volatile compounds (see, for example, Ref [4]). The spectrum of substances whose traces are found in the exhaled air extends from such diatomic molecules as hydrogen (H_{2}), carbon oxide (CO), and nitrogen (NO), to polyhydric aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons. Data have already been collected confirming the relationship between a number of gaseous compounds and some pathological processes in the human body and the possibility of using them as biomarkers to diagnose diseases. Therefore, this area of research is still quite young and little studied but very promising. The creation of appropriate gas-analyzers is interesting from the point of view of both science and technology as well as for its medical applications. These devices allow non-invasive diagnostics that should be more comfortable and safer for the patient.
Special devices are used for all these purposes, including sensors and detectors, that can be combined under one general name—gas-analyzers. Various modifications to these devices do exist, and they can differ significantly according to their operating principles [10]. Usually their function is based on some physical (optical, electrical, magnetic, and other), chemical (reaction interaction), or combined physical and chemical properties of the medium.
The simplest of these conductivity-based sensors, the thin-film sensor, was first introduced into the research community in the early 1970s. The thin-film sensor is simply a film of chemically sensitive material such as tin oxide [11] or polypyrrole [13] whose conductivity changes in response to a reduction of the chemicals in the sensing environment. There are several examples of sensors based on mass spectrometric or gas chromatographic principles. Since its development in the mid-1950s, gas chromatography–mass spectrometry has become an important instrument in the chemical analyst’s laboratory. These devices are used to determine drugs and metabolites in the pharmaceutical area and molecular weights and elemental composition in complex mixtures. However, their greatest use is the determination of volatile non-organic or organic compounds in complex mixtures as well as waters, soils, and other environmental samples.
However, it should be noted that existing devices have a number of drawbacks, namely, they are highly specialized and work with one, or perhaps several, of the substances being tested, analogous to their properties. Moreover, they are expensive and complicated to manufacture, not to mention the difficulty and inconvenience of operating them. For example, devices based on mass spectrometers are highly sensitive and accurate, but are usually very cumbersome and expensive, which require an ultra-high vacuum during their operation and their maintenance requires the presence of highly skilled specialists. All this limits their practical application and reduces their suitability to widespread use. Conversely, devices based on the use of photochemical and photoelectric processes, for example, semiconductor sensors, have a low sensitivity, and their selectivity is insufficient to detect specific substances. Furthermore, these sensors are either disposable devices or require thorough cleansing before re-use. Instruments based on gas chromatography are highly sensitive and selective but are complex and expensive in practical application.
Although it is difficult to create a universal device since adjustments are required to suit the features and areas of use of detectors, we propose a unified methodology based on the use of a glow discharge in air with the subsequent registration of the emission spectra of gas impurities in it. In Sec. III, we will demonstrate that our device is free of most of the drawbacks of present-day gas sensors. To our knowledge, the proposed method is the first based on a glow discharge in air.
EXPERIMENTAL
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. It consists of a vacuum membrane pump (1), glass cell (2) (8 mm in diameter), adjustable gas inlet valve (3), sample pretreatment chamber (4), high-voltage source (5), spectrometer (6), and computer (7). During the measurements, air pressure at a level of 10 Torr was maintained in the cell with the adjustable valve. Upon reaching operating pressure, the glow discharge with a constant current of 8 mA was ignited in the cell. The emission radiation of the discharge was directed through a fiber-optic cable to the spectrometer, whose signal was recorded and processed by the computer. In this study, we used an Avantes AvaSpec-2048TEC fiber-optic spectrometer with a high photometric sensitivity in the visible spectral range. A 50-μm wide spectrometer entrance slit and a diffraction grating with 600 lines per 1 mm provided a spectral resolution equal to 1.2 nm.
Spectrometer signals were processed in the following way: a laboratory air spectrum was recorded without introducing the test substance and this was used as a reference. The reference spectrum of laboratory air recorded in the spectral range from 335 to 882 nm is shown in Fig. 2.
The dominant lines in this spectrum are due to N_{2} band systems: the first and second positive systems are in the ranges of 600–882 and 335–500 nm, respectively [5]. The atomic oxygen line in 845 nm is due to O_{2} dissociation in air. The line of 811.5 nm corresponds to Ar, whose fraction in air is approximately 1% [6]. It should be noted that there are no water lines in the recorded spectrum.
The relative spectrum obtained without introducing gaseous impurities into analyzed air is shown in Fig. 3.
This spectrum is actually the result of dividing the reference spectrum of laboratory air by itself. This is why it is shaped as a straight horizontal line with a noise level that varies from 1% to 5%, depending on the spectrum range and registration time constant. This particular spectrum and all the spectra below were recorded with a time constant of 10 s.
It was found that the addition of, for example, acetone vapors to the analyzed air (the acetone concentration is 30 ppm) modifies the relative spectrum significantly (Fig. 4).
The acetone itself is represented in the recorded spectrum by ten closely spaced lines in the spectral range of 380–580 nm. The bright lines with the wavelengths of 656 and 486 nm correspond to the hydrogen lines Hα and Hβ of the Balmer series. The spectrum also has a number of unidentified weak lines and spectral bands.
One of the most important characteristics of any gas-analyzer is sensitivity. In medicine, forensic science, and other fields, the concentrations of the substances are between 10 ppm and 10 ppb, so the device should be designed to attain this level of sensitivity. Therefore, taking acetone as an example, a number of experiments were carried out to detect the minimum fixed concentration of the substance. To do this, a closed Teflon volume (3 × 10^{4} cm^{3}) was connected to the cell. Into this volume were added different portions of acetone, varying from 0.2 to 1 ml. The dependence of the sum of the acetone peaks recorded in the spectral range 430 nm–530 nm is shown in Fig. 5. All experimental points on Fig. 5 are taken with 10 s time constant.
It can be seen that the quantitative measurement shows that the minimum recorded sensitivity at the noise level of the detection system is about 1 ppm. With a time constant of 1000 s, a sensitivity of 30 ppb has been achieved. This sensitivity is more than enough to detect a trace of acetone in a non-invasive measurement of the glucose level in blood [7].
This experiment shows that the sensitivity of this device is on the level with the best instruments published in the literature. For example, from Refs [8] and  [9], when using a universal gas sensor based on high-Q suspended polymer photonic crystal nanocavity, the sensitivity achieved is 10–600 ppm that is about 1000 times less than our sensitivity.
Figure 6 presents the spectrum of a small isobutene impurity in analyzed air. This spectrum consists of a series of intense lines in the range of 350 ± 570 nm and weak spectral bands from 570 to 900 nm, and it is characteristic of the fluorescence of isobutene in an air discharge.
We performed experiments to record, for example, the acetone and isobutene spectra in the absence of oxygen by using pure nitrogen and argon as a carrier gas. The resulting acetone and isobutene spectra were indistinguishable from the spectra recorded in the air discharge. This result excludes the hypothetical possibility of the distortion of the impurities emission spectrum as a result of acetone oxidation caused by atmospheric oxygen that is present in the glow discharge.
It is well known that the probability of radiative transition and the strength of the oscillator are determined principally by the properties of the electronic structures rather than by the vibrational or rotational motion of the nuclei. Therefore, roughly speaking, the fluorescence intensity (in the case of atoms) is concentrated in a few peaks (see below). In molecules, the fluorescence intensity is distributed over a large number of lines. Generally speaking, the widths of atomic and molecular lines have the same order of magnitude. Hence, the height of the atomic lines is 4-5 orders of magnitude larger than that of the molecular lines. This allows us to greatly increase the sensitivity of the device in the detection of atomic impurities in air in respect of molecular detection. For example, the sensitivity of 1 ppb has been achieved for the detection of xenon with a time constant of 10 s.
SPECTRA OF VARIOUS SUBSTANCES
To demonstrate the versatility of our device, we conducted a series of experiments to record the spectra of various chemical impurities in air. Below are examples of the spectra of some atomic gaseous impurities obtained by our device.
Below are examples of the spectra of some molecular gaseous impurities obtained by our device.
The following conclusions can be drawn from the spectra obtained. The spectra of such atomic gases as argon, xenon, or mercury (Figs. 7–9) are simple with pronounced lines. For an example of the molecular spectra of organic substances, the spectra of nitroglycerin, butylamine, methane, nitric oxide (Figs. 10–13) can be noted. These have a much more complex structure with the presence of bright hydrogen lines from the Balmer series Hα-656 and Hβ-486 nm.
In total, the base current assembly is 23 spectra of various both atomic and molecular substances. A list of these substances is found in Table I.
It should be reiterated that each substance investigated has its own individual spectrum that allows us confidently to distinguish this substance against the background of various other impurities. It should be noted that many repeated measurements of all available data have been made to test the efficacy of their reproducibility in various experiments, in a wide range of air pressures in the cell (5-10 Torr), currents (5-10 mA), and cells of various diameters in the range 7-12 mm.
We should make it clear that we have not studied which specific fragments of the substances and which electronic transitions in atoms and molecules contributed to the detected spectral lines—we thought it more important that the spectra of the substances be sufficiently reproducible, allowing us to consider these spectra as the “fingerprints” of the corresponding substances.
To demonstrate the ability of the device to extract the spectrum of interest from the spectra of the numerous substances that are present in air, we carried out an experiment of the detection of a small admixture of acetone in the exhaled breath of a mouse. Before measurement, the emission spectrum of laboratory air was recorded and taken as a reference (see Fig. 2). Then we put a diabetic mouse in a box connected to the receiving part of the device and recorded the spectrum of mouse’s exhaled breath. After that we divided the spectrum obtained using reference one.
Figure 14 shows the resulting spectrum. It can be seen that the spectrum consists of a whole range of spectral components that correspond to numerous substances that are present in the mouse’s exhaled breath. Then, with the help of specialized computer program, we extracted the acetone spectrum from the resulting spectrum. The result is presented on Fig. 15.
Figure 15 clearly shows the characteristic spectral lines of acetone (430 nm–530 nm spectral range) similar to those presented in Fig. 4.
To demonstrate the capacity of the device to work in real ambulatory conditions, we have performed clinical trials to detect a small admixture of acetone in the exhaled breath of patients to carry out a noninvasive measurement of the glucose level in blood. Before beginning the measurements, we performed blood tests in order to determine the glucose level of three patients using a glucometer (Yellow Springs Instruments) [12]. Then these patients took turns breathing into the sensor until a desired air flow in the receiving part of the setup was reached. The tests for all patients were performed on an empty stomach. Figure 15 shows the extracted acetone spectrum from the spectrum exhalation breath of one of the patients who had suffered from diabetes for ten years. The figure clearly shows all the characteristic spectral lines of acetone similar to those presented in Fig. 4.
The line at 337 nm corresponds to a molecular gas NO, which is a biomarker of such diseases as cancer of the digestive organs, asthma, gastritis, and other similar ailments [2]. In the range from 350 to 430 nm, there are wide spectral bands corresponding to methane, an indicator of a gastrointestinal tract disorder. In the spectrum, there are also a number of unidentified molecular bands and lines that require a further study (Fig. 16).
The measured dependence of the acetone concentration in the exhaled breath on the glucose concentration in the blood of three patients is shown in Fig. 17.
Each point of this dependence is a single measurement for one patient. The leftmost point is the result of measurements of a healthy person. The acetone concentration measurement error was caused by the statistical error in the setup, and the blood glucose level measurement error was taken from Ref [12]. Note that to create this graph only a linear part of the graph in Fig. 5 has been used.
These two examples clearly demonstrate the capacity of our device to extract the spectrum of interest from numerous of substances presented in the exhaled breath. This is because the device detects molecular impurities when the concentration of all these substances is much lower than the concentration of nitrogen and oxygen present in the air, and these substances do not interfere with each other and do not affect the discharge parameters. This is the main limitation of the described sensor.
DISCUSSION
To characterize the selectivity of the proposed method, we introduce the quality factor Q = Δλ/δλ, where Δλ is the working spectral range of the sensor; δλ is the width of one spectral line. This factor Q for the proposed sensor working in a visible spectral range (300 nm–900 nm) with spectral resolution 1 nm is equal to 600. Moreover, using an optical device with an ultrahigh spectral resolution, for example, the Fabry-Perot etalon, a selectivity limited only by the width of the Doppler broadened line can be attained. Hence, Q can be increased by another 1000 times. This Q factor and the corresponding selectivity are unattainable by any other contemporary methods. For comparison, the parameter for a mass spectrometer with a mass spectrum of 300 amu and the width of the mass peak is 1 amu. Quality factor Q is equal to 300 that is significantly less than the parameter in the method we propose. This parameter for a terahertz spectrometer with a width of spectrum of 10 THz and the spectral resolution 1 THz is equal to 10 that is much less than this parameter in our case.
Let us summarize some other advantages of the proposed sensor.
1. In contrast to, for example, the mass spectrometer method in our case has no need of an ultrahigh vacuum that can be produced only by using an expensive turbo pump.
2. The method developed does not require the use of cryogenic temperatures that is often necessary in other methods for the operation of detectors in the infrared spectral region.
3. The proposed sensor does not need the dangerous, heavy vessels containing high pressure gases (like argon or helium), often used to carry detectable admixtures in other devices.
4. The device works in a visible spectral range in which no water lines are presented. This is because water lines are concentrated mainly in the infrared, terahertz, and millimeter ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum. These lines often create serious interference when performing accurate spectroscopic measurements. Moreover, a large amount of water vapor in the patient’s breath has a negative effect on the sensitivity and accuracy of measurements since the transmission of multi-pass absorption cells is sharply reduced because of the condensation of water vapors on optical windows.
5. Due to the bombarding of the inner surface of the discharge cell by high-temperature ions and electrons, the cell in our device remains clean after the use and does not require thorough cleansing for re-use and the sensor is immediately ready for subsequent measurements. This contrasts favorably with some devices based on the use of multi-pass absorption cells.
CONCLUSION
A sensor was developed and studied to detect traces of atoms or molecules in air based on emission spectroscopy of a glow discharge in air. The advantage of this sensor compared to other known methods is that it renders the use of ultrahigh vacuum or cryogenic temperatures superfluous. The sensor is insensitive to the presence of water vapor (for example, in exhaled air) because of the lack of strong water lines in the visible spectral range. It has a high spectral selectivity limited only by the Doppler broadening of the emission lines. The high selectivity of the sensor in combination with a wide spectral range makes it possible to detect many toxic and non-toxic impurities that can be present in the air. The device is temperature independent. It can operate in remote, harsh conditions in which it is difficult to maneuver since it can operate in the automatic mode.
The main source of device noise is the plasma stratification of a glow discharge. However, there is a way to minimize this noise and to heighten the sensitivity of detection—by using the correct combination of DC and AC currents in the discharge tube. As shown earlier, the device detects molecular impurities when the concentration of all these substances is much lower than the concentration of nitrogen and oxygen present in the air, and these substances do not interfere with each other nor do they affect the discharge parameters. This is the main limitation of the described sensor.
TABLE I. 
List of substances.
TABLE I. -body
Substances	Chemical formula
Acetone (propanone)	C_{3}H_{6}O
Ammonia	NH_{3}
Argon	Ar
Butylamine	C_{4}H_{11}N
Carbon dioxide	CO_{2}
Carbon tetrachloride	CCl_{4}
Dinitrogen	N_{2}
Dioxygen	O_{2}
Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)	C_{2}H_{6}O
Helium	He
Hexogen	C_{3}H_{6}N_{6}O_{6}
Hydrogen peroxide	H_{2}O_{2}
Isobutane (methylpropane)	C_{4}H_{10}
Isopropanol (isopropyl alcohol)	C_{3}H_{8}O
Mercury	Hg
Methane	CH_{4}
Methanol (methyl alcohol)	CH_{3}OH
Nitric oxide	NO
Nitroglycerin	C_{3}H_{5}N_{3}O_{9}
Radon	Rn
Toluene	C_{7}H_{8}
Trinitrotoluene	C_{7}H_{5}N_{3}O_{6}
Xenon	Xe
FIG. 1. 
Experimental setup.
FIG. 2. 
Reference spectrum.
FIG. 3. 
Relative spectrum.
FIG. 4. 
Acetone spectrum.
FIG. 5. 
Intensity of the sum of the acetone peaks versus acetone concentration in air.
FIG. 6. 
Isobutane spectrum.
FIG. 7. 
Mercury spectrum.
FIG. 8. 
Xenon spectrum.
FIG. 9. 
Argon spectrum.
FIG. 10. 
Nitroglycerin spectrum.
FIG. 11. 
Butylamine spectrum.
FIG. 12. 
Nitric oxide spectrum.
FIG. 13. 
Methane spectrum.
FIG. 14. 
A mouse’s exhaled breath spectrum.
FIG. 15. 
Exhaled breath spectrum of a diabetic mouse.
FIG. 16. 
Extracted acetone spectrum from spectrum exhalation breath of one of the patients who had suffered from diabetes for ten years.
FIG. 17. 
Dependence of the acetone concentration in the exhaled breath on the glucose concentration in the blood of three patients.
