Space environment simulation and sensor calibration facility
The Mumbo space environment simulation chamber discussed here comprises a set of tools to calibrate a variety of low flux, low energy electron and ion detectors used in satellite-mounted particle sensors. The chamber features electron and ion beam sources, a Lyman-alpha ultraviolet lamp, a gimbal table sensor mounting system, cryogenic sample mount and chamber shroud, and beam characterization hardware and software. The design of the electron and ion sources presented here offers a number of unique capabilities for space weather sensor calibration. Both sources create particle beams with narrow, well-characterized energetic and angular distributions with beam diameters that are larger than most space sensor apertures. The electron and ion sources can produce consistently low fluxes that are representative of quiescent space conditions. The particle beams are characterized by 2D beam mapping with several co-located pinhole aperture electron multipliers to capture relative variation in beam intensity and a large aperture Faraday cup to measure absolute current density.
I. INTRODUCTION
The space environment is populated with particles that have a broad range of energies, intensities, mass and charge composition, and directional characteristics. Accurate measurements of the resident charged particles in space must be made in order to properly understand the space environment and to develop and verify environmental models. The first energetic particle detector, a Geiger Mueller tube, flew in 1958 on Explorer 1. Its counter saturation led to the discovery of Earth’s radiation belts [1]. Since that time, many groups have flown particle sensors that cover a wide range of energies and particle species and have greatly expanded our understanding of the space environment.
Exposure of spacecraft to the energetic charged particle environment of space affects spacecraft materials and instruments. Low energy (30 eV–30 keV) particles may cause charge buildup on spacecraft surfaces leading to uncharacterized electric field gradients. Extreme differential charging on a spacecraft results in electrostatic discharge (ESD) [2]. Arcing between two differentially charged parts of the spacecraft can cause catastrophic damage to spacecraft hardware and hinder or interrupt operations. Spacecraft charging can also interfere with the measurement of the particle environment. Medium- and high-energy protons and electrons (30 keV–10 MeV) can shorten the life of a satellite by directly interacting with the internal circuitry and causing single event upsets. High-energy electrons are particularly damaging because they penetrate shielding and pass through the spacecraft which can initiate dielectric breakdowns that result in discharge damage of equipment. The effects of space weather on different spacecraft systems are summarized in the recent review by Ferguson et_al [3] In addition, astronauts are at risk of experiencing cancer, acute radiation syndromes, cardiovascular disease, and cataracts caused by ionizing radiation due to the space environment [4].
In order to better understand and predict the effects of space weather on spacecraft and astronauts, space weather must be characterized accurately, and this requires the use of high fidelity charged particle sensors. Detectors making such measurements often use electrostatic deflection to determine the energy per unit charge of particles within a fixed solid angle. In such detectors, the particle count rate is related to the incident electron differential number flux by the proportionality constant known as the energy-independent geometric factor. The geometric factor is obtained by integrating the detector response over a wide range of energies and angles. The calculation requires the determination of the detector response in energy and angle with respect to an absolute standard [5]. Theoretical geometric factors of charged particle sensors can be determined by physics-based modeling of the sensor. However, an experimental determination of the geometric factors is required in order to validate these theoretical models and provide more accurate empirically determined, sensor-specific geometric factors.
Depending on the nature of the particle and energy range of interest, a variety of calibration resources exist around the world, e.g.,
• Centre d’Etude Spatiale des Rayonnements Facility (CESR) in France for ion and electron beam calibration;
• Institutet för Rymdfysik (IRF) in Sweden for ion and electron beam calibration;
• NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Facility (GSFC-AEB) in Maryland, USA, for neutral thermal gas, neutral gas beam, electron, and ion beam calibration [6].
Briefly, the Mumbo calibration facility is unique and is particularly well-suited for spacecraft sensor calibration because the sources produce large diameter particle beams with very narrow energy and angular distributions over a broad range of energies with fluxes relevant to space sensors. Mumbo provides flux and energy characterization with accuracy far exceeding that of standard space weather sensors.
The calibration facilities were described in detail when the chamber was first designed in 1986 [5]. Since the publication of the initial report, the chamber has undergone extensive upgrades to expand and improve space weather sensor calibration capabilities. These upgrades include the construction of a new ion source, the redesign of the electron source, and an improved beam calibration system [7]. The newly designed electron and ion sources can produce extremely low flux particle beams which accurately represent the densities of quiescent space weather conditions. Accurate characterization of the low fluxes of these low energy beams necessitated the construction of an improved beam calibration system, detailed below.
Many successful spaceflight sensors have been calibrated using the Mumbo facility. These include an instrument on the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorer (AMPTE), the Low Energy Plasma Analyzer (LEPA) on the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), eight Special Sensor Precipitating Electron and Ion Spectrometer (SSJ/4) sensors flown on the Defense Metrological Satellite Program (DMSP), five SSJ/5s on recent DMSPs, the Total Energy Detector (TED) on the Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and on the Meteorological Operational Satellite Program of Europe (METOP), the Shuttle Potential and Return Electron Experiment (SPREE) on the Tethered Satellite System-1 (TSS-1), and the TSS-1R flown on the Space Shuttle mission, and several Compact Environmental Anomaly Sensor Experiment (CEASE)-IIs, and most recently, the SEISS MPS-LO sensor flown on the GOES-R series of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather satellites. Mumbo is also actively used in the development and calibration of the CEASE-RR and CEASE-III that will both be flown on Air Force demonstration missions.
II. CALIBRATION FACILITY
The upgraded Mumbo space environment and sensor calibration chamber is housed within the 330 m^{2} Spacecraft Charging and Instrument Calibration Laboratory (SCICL) of the Air Force Research Laboratory at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, USA. In addition to the capabilities detailed in this work, SCICL maintains several other vacuum chambers and support equipment that provide redundant and flexible capabilities. SCICL also maintains dry nitrogen purge boxes and a class-1000 humidity controlled cleanroom that is a suitable environment for contamination sensitive detectors such as microchannel plates.
A. Mumbo chamber
The primary calibration components are mounted in a cylindrical (184 cm long by 91 cm diameter) stainless steel vacuum chamber. The chamber is equipped with redundant dry pumping systems that employ Roots and scroll pumps for rough vacuum (10^{−3} Torr) and cryogenic and turbomolecular pumps for high vacuum (<10^{−6} Torr). These systems achieve a clean and reliable vacuum base pressure of 10^{−6} Torr after less than an hour and 10^{−7} Torr after ∼12 h of pumping from atmospheric pressure. Mumbo contains multiple Bayard-Alpert hot filament ionization gauges to monitor chamber pressure and provide safety interlocks to shut down any connected test equipment in the case of vacuum loss. These ion gauges are “blind” to the main chamber volume in that baffles prevent direct line-of-sight from the filament to the chamber, minimizing the ion and electron charged particle contamination from the ion gauges.
The chamber is equipped with a residual gas analyzer (RGA) from ExTorr^{®} to determine the cleanliness of the chamber and act as a leak detector. Residual gas background in the chamber in the “idle” state, i.e., without a sensor under calibration, is typically dominated by H_{2}O, CO, and CO_{2} gases desorbed from the chamber surfaces. A TQCM (Thermal-controlled Quartz Crystal Micro-balance) is available to measure outgassing rates and chamber cleanliness. To maintain cleanliness, all electrical cables are vacuum-baked prior to calibration to minimize contamination due to outgassing. All vacuum systems are LabVIEW^{®} controlled and vacuum conditions can be recorded automatically.
The chamber also hosts a computer controlled thermal platen with temperature capabilities of −55° C to 80° C and 21 kW heating capacity. Thermocouples can be mounted at various points in the vacuum chamber for direct temperature readouts which can be logged electronically. The thermal system also includes a full cryogenic thermal shroud that fits inside the chamber with a temperature range of −196° C to 100° C. This shroud can be liquid nitrogen cooled in order to minimize blackbody radiation from the chamber walls and provide better space-like conditions for the test article. This thermal system can be used to measure device response during thermal cycling under vacuum as programmable thermal profiles can be created and implemented.
In addition to vacuum cleanliness, the chamber has also been scrubbed for electromagnetic cleanliness. The chamber contains no permanent magnets, and two Helmholtz coils are used to null the Earth’s magnetic field along the two chamber axes perpendicular to the particle beams. The vector component of the Earth’s magnetic field that is axial to the chamber and the charged particle beams is left unmodified as it helps to guide low energy electrons to the target. Currently the coils are used to guide the beam with 4.2 μT east-west (axial), 0.017 μT north-south, and 0.009 μT up-down magnetic fields. When the Helmholtz coils are not energized, the fields are typically 8.5 μT for east-west, 5.2 μT for the north-south, and 34.7 μT for the up-down directions.
All in situ motors are powered down during calibration data acquisition intervals and are shielded in μ-metal to further reduce the risk of stray magnetic fields. Because the chamber employs electron and ion beams, it is possible that any exposed electrical insulators will develop an electro-static charge and cause distortions and diversions of the beam. All cables have been shielded with grounded conducting mesh, and all aluminum surfaces have a chromate conversion coating to retain electrical conductivity and prevent charging. A schematic of the Mumbo calibration facility is shown in Fig. 1. Individual systems are discussed in Secs. II B-II D.
B. Sensor mount/gimbal table
To determine a sensor’s geometric factor, the sensor’s response to a known beam must be measured as a function of both the azimuth and elevation of the sensor aperture relative to the known charged particle source. In order to properly do this, the sensor must be mounted on a gimbal system with two degrees of rotational freedom so that its aperture is centered at the wobble point of the gimbal system. This allows the sensor’s angle with respect to the beam to be varied, but the center of the aperture remains fixed in space. The chamber contains a two-axis gimbal with two stepper motors controlling orientation angles with respect to the beam. The gimbal position is monitored by two resolvers using 15 bits position readout with 0.02° resolution. The gimbal system is robust enough to accommodate sensors up to 15 kg, and custom mounting plates can be made in our in-house machine shop.
The data acquisition system controls instrument position, particle beam energy, and beam flux monitors and can record 22 channels (accumulators) of count rate data from the instrument undergoing calibration or other counting monitors. Eight analog measurements and 16 digital channels may also be recorded. The chamber’s calibration equipment is controlled independently of the vacuum system using a LabVIEW code developed in-house and referred to as Calibration System 4 (CALSYS4). In addition to controlling instrument position, beam conditions, and logging sensor data, CALSYS4 provides handshaking capabilities with a sensor via transistor-transistor logic (TTL) pulses. Mumbo has a variety of electrical, gas, and motion feedthroughs to connect the sensor being calibrated to its ground station. Conflat^{®} flange terminated vacuum feedthroughs ranging from 2.75 in. to 8 in. outer diameter have been built around the sensor mount for additional flexibility and custom cable configurations.
C. Electron source
An ideal calibration beam is significantly larger than the aperture of the sensor under test. A large beam allows for greater flexibility in sensor placement, better beam flux characterization, and minimizes edge effects. The details of the design and construction of the 10 eV–50 keV electron source are discussed here, as there are a number of key differences from the original design [5]. Electrons are produced by photoelectric emission from a biased ultraviolet (UV) illuminated photocathode, shown in Fig. 2. The photocathode consists of a 2 cm thick by 30.5 cm diameter quartz disk coated on one face with a layer of gold thin enough to be semi-transparent to UV light. The use of a large area planar electron source allows for the production of a relatively flat flux profile compared to a point electron source. The variation in the electron flux across the beam is limited by the distribution of incident UV photons on the cathode and can be photometrically flat-fielded. In the original experimental design, the thickness was ∼40 nm in order to minimize UV leakage through the cathode. However, using a new photocathode with a 10 nm Au layer yields an improvement in electron generation efficiency of two orders of magnitude [8,9]. The flux of the beam using the thinner Au cathode is then controlled by placing neutral density (ND) filters between the UV lamp and the cathode. Using the 10-nm photocathode, rather than the 40-nm photocathode, allows comparable electron fluxes to be produced with less scattered UV light in the chamber and improves the ability to control electron flux.
The photocathode is illuminated from the rear by a 200 W ex situ Spectra Physic xenon-mercury arc lamp. This lamp emits a band of 0.2 W/sr UV light centered at 250 nm with approximately 10 nm spread FWHM. This wavelength is near the photoelectric threshold for gold thus producing a small kinetic energy spread (∼0.3 eV) in the emitted electrons. A single 90% transmission 70 line/in. grounded Cu screen located 8 cm from the biased photocathode provides a uniform field through which the electrons are accelerated. This configuration reduces space charge effects on the beam and ensures uniformity. A typical maximum electron flux is 1 × 10^{9} electrons/(cm^{2}/s). Lower beam current can be achieved with the use of neutral density filters at the UV source. Attenuation of the UV flux by a ND = 1 (1.39 at 250 nm) filter typically produces a flux of 4.1 × 10^{7} electrons/(cm^{2}/s), the flux used to calibrate recent sensors. Production of smaller fluxes can be accomplished by using different ND filters. After a vacuum break, the flux from the electron gun decreases, often by as much as an order of magnitude. This diminished flux then increases to a stable higher flux over a period of several days. We attribute this temporary decrease in flux to adsorbed contamination on the Au surface.
Because the beam flux is so low, a large aperture (10.16 cm diameter) Faraday cup is required to produce an adequate signal to noise ratio. The drawback of a Faraday cup with a diameter that is a significant fraction of the total beam diameter is that it cannot be used to determine beam uniformity. To overcome this, a quartet of small aperture (typically 1.3 mm diameter) electron multiplier tubes are used to scan the beam’s cross section to determine relative spatial uniformity and the Faraday cup provides absolute flux. The electron beam has an energy half width, E_{i} = 0.5 eV, and an angular half width given by the relation Δθ ≈ arctan(E_{i}/E_{b}), where E_{b} is the beam energy. This relation predicts the observed Δθ = 1.2° at E_{b} = 24 eV. The electron calibration system has proven robust, although it is necessary to recoat the gold cathode to restore the beam current density and beam uniformity after ∼50 vacuum breaks. Figure 3 presents a typical beam map of 6700 eV electron beam.
The electrons emitted from the cathode have an initial translational energy that varies from near zero to the energy of the incident photon minus the Au cathode work function (0.3 eV). Once the electrons are emitted, they are accelerated towards the grounded grid. Due to the initial energetic and angular distributions of the photoelectrons, the beam has a ∼0.5 eV energy spread that is independent of the accelerating voltage. The total beam divergence depends on the energy of the beam, but for energies above 100 eV, the divergence is less than 1°. The beam energy distribution on the order of 0.5 eV is much smaller than the typical energy resolution of the electron detectors calibrated in this chamber, typically ΔE/E ∼ 10%.
D. Ion source
The Mumbo calibration facility also features a 20 eV–15 keV ion source which is located in an auxiliary chamber attached axially to the end of the vacuum chamber replacing the UV window of the electron source. It uses a hot filament to ionize nitrogen via electron impact. Despite N_{2} not being present in space, it is typically used for calibrations because most electrostatic analyzers used in sensors are species agnostic and measure only particle kinetic energy.
The ion source is based on an adaptation of a Kaufman thruster design which has typically been used for ion calibration at energies below 150 eV [10,11]. To narrow the Kaufman style thruster’s angular divergence sufficiently for calibration purposes, the source was placed at the end of a 1.8 m long, 25.4 cm diameter vacuum chamber (or drift tube); see Fig. 4. The ion source vacuum chamber is differentially pumped by two small Varian 70LP turbomolecular pumps to a base pressure of <1 × 10^{−6} Torr. A hot filament (thoriated tungsten ribbon wire) is used to ionize the source gas by electron bombardment within an ionization chamber. The gas pressure in the ionization chamber is typically 4.5 × 10^{−5} Torr. A photograph of the ion source chamber is shown in Fig. 5. The ionization source is electrically isolated from the vacuum chamber and biased to the desired ion beam potential. An ex situ Cu coil wound around the drift tube, over the ionization chamber, provides a toroidal magnetic field of 1 mT in the ionization chamber to spatially constrain electrons and increase ionization efficiency. Two 60% transmission grids, one at −60 V and one at chamber ground, are located 2 cm downstream of the exit grid to extract ions and help retain the ionizing primary electrons. The acceleration grid is followed by a third 60% transmission grid at the chamber ground potential. By simple geometry, the drift tube confines the angular divergence to be less than 3°. This is confirmed by mapping the beam flux at two different axial locations in the chamber and measuring the expansion. An angular divergence of 2.6° FWHM was determined.
The ion flux can be adjusted using source gas pressure and/or the electron filament current, with a maximum flux of 500 fA/cm^{2}. For a singly charged ion, this is equivalent to 3.125 × 10^{6} ions/(cm^{2}/s). As the energy of the beam decreases, the flux of the beam also decreases. This effect is most prominent for ion energies below 500 V. Adjustments must be made to the source conditions (input gas pressure and filament current) in order to maintain a constant flux over the entire range of ion energies.
The energy distribution of the ion beam is 0.4 eV at energies below 40 eV and 1% of the beam energy when greater than 40 eV. Generally the instruments calibrated by this chamber have energy resolution, ΔE/E, on the order of 10% FWHM, which is significantly broader than the energy distribution of the ion source. At beam energies less than 50 eV, a low energy tail extends beyond the approximate Gaussian energy distribution of the beam. This is due to electrons penetrating into the region between the acceleration plate and the ionization chamber. This forms ions in the middle of the accelerating potential, leading to incomplete acceleration. Figure 6 shows a map of a 6700-eV ion beam measured at the position of the linear slide assembly (item B in Fig. 1).
III. SENSOR CALIBRATION
One of the key aspects of the calibration process is accurately determining the flux of the electron or ion source. Determining the electron flux by measuring the current provided by the accelerating potential power supply to the Au cathode in the electron source generally provides an overestimation of the flux at the sensor aperture and yields no information about the spatial profile of the beam. Combining a 10 cm Faraday cup and an ex situ electrometer overcomes these deficiencies and has a noise floor of 1.3 fA/cm^{2}. This Faraday cup is equipped with a grid mounted over the collection aperture which is biased to −30 V. This is used to eliminate the detection of secondary electrons generated within the Faraday cup, which for keV beams can be greater than the beam current. This Faraday cup has a measured electron capture efficiency of 90%. Sensor solar blindness can be tested using a krypton discharge ultraviolet lamp to simulate Lyman alpha radiation (Opthos Instruments, Inc.).
Typical space weather sensors have apertures on the order of 1 cm diameter, significantly smaller than the diameter of the Faraday cup. The ideal calibration procedure would measure the absolute beam flux in small steps throughout the beam with a small aperture Faraday cup. However, due to the low beam flux, this is impractical. We therefore use four small aperture channel electron multiplier systems (CEMSs, Amptektron^{®} from Amptek^{®}) which measure the relative flux. These are small (adjustable) aperture charged particle counters. The apertures are most commonly adjusted to 1.3 mm diameter. A CEMS consists of a charged particle multiplier combined with fully packaged electronics used to count the number of incident charged particles. They have an advertised count rate greater than 10^{6} counts/s. This allows us to measure a flux between 10^{4} and 10^{7} particles/(cm^{2}/s). Beams of greater or lesser flux can be measured with the CEMS by varying the size of the aperture. The CEMSs are mounted on an XY translation stage with a spatial resolution of 25 μm. Generally, steps of 6.35 mm are used to create a beam map of ∼254 cm^{2}. This is a large enough area to accurately map the beam and is 6 times larger than the area of the Faraday cup. We average the output of the four CEMSs, which are mounted with their apertures in a 25.4 mm square, resulting in a single beam map. The area of the beam map is integrated over the area of the Faraday cup and the integrated digital numbers from the electron multiplier are then converted to electron (or ion) flux by scaling to the Faraday cup reading.
During the calibration of an electrostatic analyzer, the response of the analyzer to different angles and beam energies is measured. These measurements are used to calculate the energy pass band and angular response. The energy-dependent geometric factor is calculated from the measured count rates at each angular position [5].
All of these systems are controlled using a LabVIEW data acquisition system (CALSYS4) and can be configured to meet the needs of the individual user. The high degree of automation allows for fine beam voltage and sensor angular steps to be programmed into the system and run overnight. This reduces the calibration cost and time required and allows for finer resolution than would be practical with manual calibrations.
IV. CONCLUSION
As space becomes more accessible with advancing technology, an accurate understanding of space weather becomes only ever more important. In order to understand the complicated environment of space, high fidelity sensors must gather data. Determination of the accuracy of the gathered data is defined by the calibration of the sensor. The Mumbo calibration facility is well suited for the calibration of charged particle detectors at low fluxes, particularly those sensors used for measuring space particle fluxes.
The chamber features electron and ion beam sources, a gimbal table sensor mounting system, cryogenic sample mount and chamber shroud, and beam characterization hardware and software. Mumbo can generate well characterized electron beams between 10 eV and 50 keV and ion beams between 20 eV and 15 keV with beam diameters that are larger than most space sensor apertures, thereby minimizing edge effects and allowing freedom in sensor geometry and placement. The electron beam has an energy half width of 0.5 eV and an angular divergence of 1.2° at a beam energy of 24 eV. The energy distribution of the ion beam is 0.4 eV at energies below 40 eV and 1% of the beam energy greater than 40 eV.
Further, the electron and ion sources can produce low fluxes which are representative of quiescent space conditions. The particle beams are characterized by 2D beam mapping with several co-located pinhole aperture electron multiplier tubes to capture relative variation in beam intensity and a large aperture Faraday cup to measure absolute current density.
FIG. 1. 
Presents a top-down schematic of the Mumbo calibration chamber in the SCICL laboratory with component features including a Faraday cup (A), 2 axis linear slide assembly (B) used for beam mapping, cathode electron source (C), and gimbal table mounting system (D). The ion source and UV lamp used to illuminate the cathode attach to the right-side port. Details of each part of the system will be discussed below. In the text, the word beam is used to refer to both electron and ion beams if neither is specified.
FIG. 2. 
Photograph of electron gun assembly. Foreground: gold cathode. Middleground: grounded mesh. Background: gimbal table.
FIG. 3. 
Beam map of 6700 eV electron beam.
FIG. 4. 
Ion source chamber. Ions are generated in region C and are accelerated towards the main chamber which is attached on the left side in this illustration.
FIG. 5. 
Photograph of the ion gun chamber. See Fig. 4 for details.
FIG. 6. 
Beam map of a 6700 eV ion beam.
