Dynamics of an atmospheric pressure planar plume with two naked electrodes excited by an alternating current voltage
A large-scale plasma plume has been generated downstream of an argon flow with two naked electrodes excited by an alternating current voltage. Complicated dynamics under various dissipated powers are investigated for the planar plume. Results indicate that, besides the primary oscillations of the applied voltage at 70 kHz, a secondary oscillation is observed for the amplitude envelope of the gas voltage. Furthermore, the secondary oscillation is composed of an increasing amplitude region and a fluctuating amplitude one. With increasing the dissipated power, the duration time of the increasing amplitude region increases, and that of the fluctuating amplitude region decreases until the latter one disappears completely. The secondary oscillation frequency is investigated as a function of the dissipated power and the gas velocity. Detailed waveforms of the gas voltage, the current, and the integrated light emission are investigated for the two regions. Moreover, comprehensive investigations are performed using fast photography over the planar plume, synchronized with simultaneously recorded waveforms. It is found that the secondary oscillation originates from the dynamical movement of a plasma column, which periodically generates in the vicinity of the outlet and disappears at the plume tail.
I. INTRODUCTION
Atmospheric pressure non-equilibrium plasmas have attracted much attention due to abundant active species in them [1,2]. They have great potentials in various applications, such as sterilization [3,4], carbon nanotubes deposition [5], plasma catalysis [6], surface modification [7–9], and material etching [10].
In some applications, large-scale plasmas at atmospheric pressure are desirable because they can improve the working efficiency [11–13]. Hence, lots of attempts have been implemented to achieve large-scale plasmas. Excited by a nanosecond pulsed voltage, a 1.1 m wide planar air plasma has been generated between two parallel lines separated by several centimeters [14]. Based on a tri-electrode configuration, a 10 cm wide planar plasma has been achieved with an air gap width of 2.0 cm [15]. A 3.0 cm long planar plasma with a width of 3.8 cm has been obtained in flowing argon between a line and a plate [11]. The aforementioned large-scale plasmas are all produced in a confined space between electrodes.
Compared with its counterparts, large-scale plasma plume generated in the open space is more satisfactory for applications [16–18]. Gliding arc has the ability to generate such kind of air plasma under a low direct-current (DC) current especially in an overshooting stage [19–22]. The gliding arc can also be excited by an alternating current (AC) voltage [23,24]. Besides the gliding arc, a planar plume excited by a DC voltage has been generated through blowing a preheated air flow [25]. Even without preheating the air, a pulsed planar plume has also been reported with two opposite needles excited by a DC voltage [16]. For a similar plume excited by an AC voltage, investigation on its dynamical behavior indicates that the instantaneous peak voltage increases with decreasing the instantaneous peak current [17]. Under a high dissipated AC power, an abrupt change in the waveforms of the voltage and the current has been found for an air planar plume, which is associated with the breakdown-induced short-cutting event [24].
Generally speaking, large-scale air plasmas at atmospheric pressure have an elevated gas temperature [26,27]. In order to reduce gas temperature, inert gases have been experimentally attempted [28,29]. A planar argon plume with a reduced temperature has been created with two naked electrodes [12,30]. Dynamic behavior presents that the discharge is pulsed despite a DC power supply is used [30].
In this paper, a large-scale argon plume is generated downstream of two naked electrodes excited by an AC voltage. By fast photography and simultaneously recorded waveforms, more complicated dynamics under different dissipated powers are investigated.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 1 demonstrates a schematic diagram of the experimental setup. The discharge device is similar with that in Ref [30]. Two 1.0 mm-diameter copper rods separated by 15 mm are oppositely set at the outlet of a rectangle quartz duct (inner 2.5 mm × 15 mm), along which 99.99% argon flows with 10.0 l/min (equals to about 4.4 m/s). The gas velocity is adjusted in order to keep a laminar flow mode. The rod electrodes are electrically connected with an AC power supply (Suman, CTP-2000K) via a ballast resistor (R =100 kΩ), which produces a sinusoidal signal with a frequency of 70 kHz. The gas voltage, the current, and the integrated light emission are detected by a high voltage probe (Tektronix P6015A), a current probe (Tektronix TCPA300), and a photomultiplier tube (PMT) (ET 9085SB), respectively. Their waveforms can be simultaneously recorded by an oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO4104). Discharge image can be captured by a digital camera (Canon EOS 7D) with an exposure time of 0.1 s. The discharge evolution is investigated with a high-speed video camera (Cooke, Pco.dimax) with an exposure time of 20 μs. An intensified charge-coupled device (ICCD) (Andor DH334) is synchronized with the oscilloscope by an external trigger (Tektronix AFG3021); therefore, the ICCD image and the corresponding waveforms can be recorded simultaneously.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
With increasing the peak value of the applied voltage to some extent, a planar plume appears downstream of the argon flow, as shown in Fig. 2. The plume with a width of 15 mm and a height of several centimeters can be clearly observed, which is similar to the large-scale plume excited by a DC voltage [12]. The large-scale plume in Fig. 2 consists of a quasi-uniform region at the core and asymmetric brighter zones at the two sides. The left side (the ground electrode side) is much slimmer than the right side (the powered electrode side). No matter which camera is used, there is a dark region in the vicinity of the outlet. Moreover, the plasma plume turns longer and the dark area increases with increasing the dissipated power (P_{d}), which is calculated from waveforms of the current i(t) and the gas voltage u(t) by P_{d}=∫0Tut×itdtT. Here T is one cycle of the secondary oscillation, which will be defined later.
The gas temperature is measured by a fiber thermocouple (FOT-301), which has been successfully used to achieve the gas temperature of a DC-excited argon plume [31]. The 70 kHz AC power supply is replaced by a DC power supply (Glassman, EK15R40) to compare their gas temperatures at the plume tail. As shown in Fig. 3, the gas temperature of the argon plume is only several tens of degrees centigrade, which is much lower than that of air plume [17]. The gas temperature of the two plumes increases when increasing the dissipated power or decreasing the gas velocity. Moreover, the AC plume has a slightly lower temperature than the DC plume. This phenomenon may be caused by the fact that the AC plume can be continuously cooled by the flowing gas during the discharge rest.
Figure 4 indicates the temporal evolution of the argon plasma plume excited by the AC voltage. In the vicinity of the outlet, a plasma column first appears not in the narrowest gap, but at a certain distance downstream. Subsequently, the plasma column propagates along the gas flow and elongates downstream with its touch points always anchoring at the electrode ends. During the propagation, the plasma column keeps a regular shape until random twists appear (1170 μs). The twists become more and more severe, and a new plasma column appears in the vicinity of the outlet (3120 μs). The newly born plasma column will repeat this process. Therefore, the dark region in Fig. 2 comes from the fact that new plasma columns are always generated at a certain distance from the outlet. The propagation of the regular plasma column at a constant velocity results in the quasi-uniform core region. The uniformity is destroyed by the random twists of the plasma column. Furthermore, the brighter sides in Fig. 2 can be attributed to the temporal superposition of the moving plasma columns in Fig. 4.
As mentioned above, the plasma column varies between a minimal length and a maximal one. Therefore, the minimum and maximum of the column length are investigated as functions of the dissipated power and the gas velocity. As shown in Fig. 5(a), both the minimal length and the maximal one increase when increasing the dissipated power. The maximal length increases, while the minimal length decreases with increasing the gas velocity, as shown in Fig. 5(b).
Ultraviolet (UV) photons emitted from the discharge and the excited species such as metastable atoms and radicals play an important role for the initial breakdown of a plasma column and the subsequent re-ignition during its movement. Among them, the residual excited species will help the re-ignition of an existing plasma column, as they do in a regular dielectric barrier discharge. With their help, the existing plasma column will move on along the gas flow until the applied electric field cannot re-ignite it any more at the plume tail. Consequently, the quantity of excited species will influence the position where the plasma column stops moving (the maximal length of the plasma column). Compared with the excited species, the UV photons can help trigger the initial breakdown of a new filament by enhancing the quantity of seed electrons because the UV photons can act at a distance from where they are produced. Therefore, the UV photons will affect the initiation position of the new column (the minimal length of the plasma column). To initiate the new column, more seed electrons will be generated at a shorter distance from the disappearing column where the UV photons are produced. Hence, the new plasma column tends to initiate at a longer distance from the outlet if only the role of the UV photons are considered. Besides the UV photons, the intensity of applied field can influence the breakdown position of the new filament. Due to the decreasing field with increasing distance from the outlet, the new plasma column tends to initiate at a shorter distance from the outlet. As a competing result of the UV photons and the applied field, the new plasma column will initiate at a shorter distance from the outlet with increasing the applied field intensity or emitting less UV photons from the plume tail. That is to say, the minimal length of the plasma column decreases with increasing the field intensity or less UV photons.
Considering the role of the excited species, the maximal length of the plasma column as a function of the dissipated power and the gas velocity can be explained as follows. More energy is dissipated by a breakdown event of the primary oscillation (70 kHz oscillation), which generates a denser plasma column with more excited species. Hence, the plasma column will move a longer distance with the help of more residual excited species. Consequently, the maximal length increases with increasing the dissipated power. In addition, oxygen in the ambient air will diffuse into the argon in the laminar flow mode [32], which will quench the residual excited species [33]. At a certain position, there will be less air diffused into the working gas with increasing the gas flow rate, leading to more residual excited species. Consequently, the plasma column will move a longer distance with increasing the gas flow rate. That is to say, the maximal length increases with increasing the gas flow rate.
As mentioned above, the maximal length of the plasma column increases with increasing the gas velocity, which results in an increment in the impedance of the plasma column. Hence, it can be deduced that the applied peak voltage just before the breakdown of the new filament increases with increasing the gas velocity. This means that the new plasma column will be initiated with a higher electric field with increasing the gas flow velocity. Accordingly, the minimal column length decreases with increasing the gas velocity. Based on the same reason, it can also be deduced that the minimal column length will decrease with increasing the dissipated power due to the increasing maximal length. However, more UV photons are produced with increasing the dissipated power, which leads to an increment in the minimal length. Under their mutual effects, the minimal column length slightly increases with increasing the dissipated power.
Figure 6 presents typical waveforms of the gas voltage at a time span of 4 ms under different P_{d}. Besides the 70 kHz oscillation (the primary oscillation), the gas voltage has a periodical envelope (denoted as the secondary oscillation) despite the experimental parameters keep constant. As shown in Fig. 6(a), a 2.6 ms cycle of the secondary oscillation is composed of an increasing amplitude region (R_{in}) lasting from 0.8 ms to 1.8 ms and a fluctuating amplitude region (R_{fl}) lasting from 1.8 ms to 3.4 ms. Furthermore, the maximum and the duration time of one fluctuation increase with time in R_{fl}. Comparing Fig. 6(a) with Fig. 6(b), it is obvious that the duration of R_{in} increases and that of R_{fl} decreases with increasing P_{d}. Moreover, the secondary oscillation cycle (the duration of R_{in} + R_{fl}) also increases. Finally, R_{fl} disappears completely and only R_{in} with a duration of 3.7 ms is left when P_{d} is high enough, as shown in Fig. 6(c).
The frequency of the secondary oscillation is indicated in Fig. 7 as a function of the dissipated power and the gas velocity. It can be found that the frequency of the secondary oscillation decreases with increasing the dissipated power. Moreover, there is a slope change with a dissipated power of approximately 92 W. However, the secondary oscillation frequency increases with increasing the gas velocity.
As will be discussed later, the secondary oscillation originates from the periodical movement of the plasma column. Therefore, the secondary oscillation frequency is determined by the time interval of the plasma column moving from the minimal length to the maximal length. With increasing the dissipated power, the plasma column travels a longer distance, which is clear in Fig. 2. This means a longer time interval due to the plasma column moving at a constant velocity. Consequently, the secondary oscillation frequency decreases with increasing the dissipated power. The decreasing slope change at approximately 92 W maybe results from the fact that the secondary oscillation with a lower dissipated power is composed of R_{in} and R_{fl}, while only R_{in} is left with a higher power. With increasing the gas velocity, the time interval decreases although the plasma column travels a longer distance, which can be deduced from Fig. 5(b). Consequently, the secondary oscillation frequency increases with increasing the gas velocity.
Figure 8 illustrates detailed waveforms of the gas voltage, the current, and the integrated light emission, which corresponds to the shadowed areas in Fig. 6. At the beginning of R_{in}, the gas-voltage amplitude is relatively low at 1.1 kV [Fig. 8(a)]. There are one current pulse and one emission pulse per half voltage cycle. Symmetric peaks of the current (the light emission) appear almost at the same time with peaks of the gas voltage. With the gas-voltage amplitude increasing to about 1.3 kV, there is still one current pulse (emission pulse) per half voltage cycle; however, asymmetry sets in for the current pulses (the emission pulses) of different polarities, as shown in Fig. 8(b). With the elapse of time, the secondary oscillation enters R_{fl}, an abrupt gas-voltage change appears between two consecutive fluctuations, as shown in Fig. 8(c). After the abrupt change, the voltage amplitude increases from 1.2 kV to 3.3 kV with time until the next fluctuation appears. Apparently, only two current pulses are discernable in one fluctuation. A higher pulse just before the abrupt voltage change is followed by a lower pulse just after that. However, there is still one emission pulse per half voltage cycle, whose intensity increases with time in one fluctuation. The increasing emission intensity is similar to that reported in the gliding arc [23]. Comparing Fig. 8(c) with Fig. 8(d), it can be found that the duration of one fluctuation increases with time.
Figure 9 demonstrates instantaneous images of the plasma plume captured by the ICCD synchronized with waveforms of the gas voltage and the current shown in Fig. 8. Due to the random trigger, the discharge captured by the ICCD may be strong (correspond to the peak voltage) or weak (correspond to the decay of the plasma column). In order to make it clear, image contrast is adjusted. As shown in Fig. 9, the plasma column keeps almost constant length for adjacent gates, such as Figs. 9(c) and 9(d), because its propagation can be neglected in such a short time. Figure 9 indicates that the plasma column is shorter in R_{in}, and longer in R_{fl}. Hence, in one secondary oscillation, the plasma column with the minimal length is first generated in the vicinity of the outlet and then it elongates along the argon flow. With the elongating, the amplitude of the secondary oscillation increases continuously. Therefore, it can be concluded that the secondary oscillation results from the periodical movement of the plasma column. To illustrate the discharge more clearly, two zoomed-in images captured with an exposure time of 500 ns are presented in Figs. 9(i) and 9(j). A spatial structure including a negative glow (NG), a Faraday dark space (FDS), and a positive column (PC) can be found in the plasma column, which is similar to the glow discharge at low pressure. The NG, also referred to as the cathode fall region, is a characteristic region for the glow discharge regime, which suggests that the discharge is in a glow regime. It is worth to point out that NG and FDS can also be observed near the other electrode when it acts as the instantaneous cathode. Moreover, striation phenomenon in the positive column is also observed.
As pointed out by Massines et_al [34], the streamer breakdown mechanism is involved when the product of the gas gap (d) and the pressure (p) becomes around 100 Torr cm, in which an ionization wave quickly propagates from the anode to the cathode [35]. The pd value is much higher than 100 Torr cm for our discharge; hence the streamer mechanism is involved. After the ionization wave reaches the cathode, the spatial profile of the electric field changes abruptly, resulting in a cathode fall region in front of it. Due to the finite time of the field shielding, the positive column with a relatively high field appears in the AC discharge. Due to the higher field, excitation and ionization collisions between electrons and neutral particles are abundant in the positive column at atmospheric pressure, which results in a more intense emission from the positive column. Therefore, there is no clear difference in the emission intensity between the positive column and the negative glow. These glow discharge characteristics have been numerically simulated by Golubovskii et_al [35]
Impedance of the plasma column can be calculated by the ratio of the gas voltage to the current in root-mean-square value [24], which is easily obtained in R_{in} and marked in Fig. 9. However, for R_{fl}, it is only calculated just before the abrupt gas voltage change, such as Figs. 9(f) and 9(h). Though this method, dependence of the impedance on time is obtained. As shown in Fig. 10, the minimal impedance increases with time in one secondary oscillation cycle. That is to say, it increases with the plasma column elongating.
Suppose the impedance of the plasma column is R_{i}, then the current (I) can be given by
Here, ε_{p} is the electromotive force of the AC power source and r is the resistance of the other part in the electric circuit. Therefore, the gas voltage (U) is given by
From Eqs. (1) and (2), it can be deduced that U increases with increasing R_{i}, which is positively related to the column length. Consequently, the maximum of the voltage envelope increases with the plasma column moving away from the outlet.
Discharge mechanism of the AC driven planar plume can be qualitatively analyzed below. A glow-discharge plasma column with the minimal length is first ignited due to a streamer breakdown event in the vicinity of the outlet. After the breakdown, the pre-ionized channel with residual charges and reactive species is blown to a new region adjacent to it. Being aided by the residual charges and radicals in the pre-ionized channel, a new breakdown occurs when the gas voltage increases to its critical value in the next half cycle of the primary oscillation. Hence, the shorter plasma column presents a current pulse (an emission pulse) per half voltage cycle in R_{in}. Breakdown in some half cycle of the primary oscillation will take place ahead of schedule if there are more residual charges, leading to a lower discharge current due to the reduced field for breakdown. This implies that the plasma column with a lower electron density is generated. Hence, less charges and radicals will be left to aid the next breakdown, resulting in a higher discharge current in the next half cycle of the primary oscillation. Consequently, asymmetric current pulses appear for the different polarities, as shown in Fig. 8(b).
As mentioned above, one breakdown event in R_{fl} corresponds to a longer plasma column. Compared with that in R_{in}, a higher current pulse can be formed because a higher electric field is needed to initiate the discharge again after it quenches for several voltage cycles. Once the discharge initiates with the higher current, a plasma column will abruptly shortcut the two electrodes, resulting in an abrupt change of the gas voltage. This phenomenon is similar to that found in the gliding arc [24]. After the breakdown event [the higher current pulse in Figs. 8(c) and 8(d)], lots of residual charges and radicals will contribute to the discernable current pulse (the following lower current pulse in Fig. 8). Then the current cannot be observed any more due to the decay of the pre-ionized channel until the next breakdown event in R_{fl}, which does not occur until the gas voltage again reaches the threshold after some half cycle recovery of the voltage. During the voltage recovery, there are weak emission pulses for the longer plasma column in some half cycles although the voltage is not high enough to initiate a discernable discharge current (corresponds to a breakdown event) [23]. This phenomenon implies that the residual charges always exists between two successive breakdown events. During the voltage recovery, residual electrons in the channel can excite neutral particles, which emit light through the de-excitation process. The electric field increases with time because the voltage amplitude recovers, resulting in more energetic electrons to excite neutral particles. Hence, the emission intensity increases with time in Fig. 8. The plasma column reaches its maximal length when it reaches the plume tail, and the gas voltage will be high enough to induce a new breakdown event in the vicinity of the gas outlet. Hence, a new secondary oscillation begins.
In a word, the plasma column initiates once per half voltage cycle when it is short, and per several half cycles when it is long. No matter where it is, the pre-ionized channel with the residual charges and radicals is always blown along the gas flow, which presents an emission pulse per half voltage cycle.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In summary, a large-scale planar plume is generated downstream of two rods excited by the 70 kHz AC voltage, which is found to be the temporal superposition of a plasma column propagating along the argon flow. Through electrical methods, it is found that besides the applied primary oscillation, the secondary oscillation is observed, which has two regions: R_{in} and R_{fl}. With increasing the dissipated power, the duration time of R_{in} increases, and that of R_{fl} decreases until R_{fl} disappears completely. There are one current pulse and one emission pulse per half voltage cycle in R_{in}. In R_{fl}, there is still one emission pulse per half voltage cycle; however, only two current pulses per fluctuation can be found just before and after the abrupt voltage change. Results indicate that the secondary oscillation is attributed to the periodical movement of the plasma column. With propagating away from the outlet, the shorter plasma column initiates once per half voltage cycle in R_{in}. It initiates in average less than once per several half cycles in R_{fl}. No matter where the pre-ionized channel is, it is always blown along the gas flow. All of the results may shed light to the complicated dynamics of the planar plasma plume at atmospheric pressure.
FIG. 1. 
Schematic diagram of the experimental setup.
FIG. 2. 
Images captured by the digital camera for the plasma plume under different P_{d}: (a) 60 W, (b) 70 W, and (c) 160 W. (d) to (f) are captured by the ICCD, which correspond to (a), (b), and (c), respectively. The exposure time is 0.1 s.
FIG. 3. 
The gas temperature as a function of the dissipated power (a) and the gas velocity (b).
FIG. 4. 
Spatial and temporal evolution of the plasma plume under P_{d} = 70 W taken by the high-speed video camera with an exposure time of 20 μs.
FIG. 5. 
The minimum and maximum of the plasma column length as a function of the dissipated power (a) and the gas velocity (b).
FIG. 6. 
Waveform of the gas voltage at a time span of 4 ms under different P_{d}: (a) 60 W, (b) 70 W, and (c) 160 W.
FIG. 7. 
Frequency of the secondary oscillation as a function of the dissipated power (a) and the gas velocity (b).
FIG. 8. 
Detailed waveforms of the gas voltage, the current and the integrated light emission from the plume. (a) to (d) correspond to the shadowed areas1 to 4 marked in Fig. 6(b), respectively.
FIG. 9. 
Single-shot images of the plasma plume captured by the ICCD, the exposure time is 4 μs from (a) to (h) and 500 ns for (i) and (j). (a) to (h) correspond to G1 to G8 marked in Fig. 8, respectively. The delay time is 4 μs from (a) to (b), roughly 1000 μs from (b) to (c), 4 μs from (c) to (d), 1000 μs from (d) to (e), 10 μs from (e) to (f), 1000 μs from (f) to (g), and 30 μs from (g) to (h).
FIG. 10. 
Temporal evolution of the minimal impedance with a plasma column moving away from the gas outlet.
