Super-Alfvénic translation of a field-reversed configuration into a large-bore dielectric chamber
An experimental device to demonstrate additional heating and control methods for a field-reversed configuration (FRC) has been developed. The newly developed device, named FRC Amplification via Translation (FAT), has a field-reversed theta-pinch plasma source and a low-elongation dielectric (transparent quartz) confinement chamber with quasi-static confinement field. In the initial experiments on the FAT device, FRC translation and trapping were successfully demonstrated. Although the typical elongation of the trapped FRC in the confinement region was roughly three, no disruptive global instability, such as tilt, was observed. The FAT device increases the latitude to perform translation-related experiments, such as those concerning inductive current drive, equivalent neutral beam injection effects, and wave applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
A field-reversed configuration (FRC) is a compact toroid with a primarily poloidal magnetic field [1]. Because of its simply connected configuration, an FRC can be translated axially and trapped in a confinement chamber along an interconnected magnetic field guide. In the most promising fusion reactor scenario with an FRC core, an FRC is first formed by the field-reversed theta-pinch (FRTP) method and then translated into a confinement section where it is heated by neutral beam injection (NBI) to reach a burning state [2]. However, the resulting FRC has yet to achieve sufficient trapped flux to capture tangentially injected NBI fast ions. Therefore, development of additional heating and current-drive methods is an urgent priority. To investigate the feasibility of possible additional heating and current-drive methods, such as inductive current drive and magnetic pumping, a new FRC device with an FRTP plasma source and a translation region with a dielectric chamber has been developed.
Unlike most FRC devices, the FAT device has a dielectric chamber of exceedingly large bore-size compared to the confinement chamber length. Therefore, an FRC experiences rapid radial expansion in the translation process. The theta-pinch-formed FRCs in the FAT device are successfully translated without disruption, even throughout the violent process of translation into the low-elongation chamber (low length-to-diameter ratio of confinement vessels). Most FRC translation experiments that achieve a globally stable FRC have a high-elongation length/diameter of the device (for example, 13 in FRX-C/T [3], 3.8 in FIX [4], and 3.1 in TCS [5]) and, thereby, a high-elongation separatrix shape. By contrast, the elongation of 1.3 for the FAT device represents the lowest-elongation vessel among the conventional theta-pinch-type FRC experiments.
In magnetic compression experiments on the FRX-C/LSM [6] and rotating magnetic field FRC current-drive experiments on the TCS [5], a dielectric chamber (quartz tube) was installed to avoid any induction phenomenon caused by an externally applied magnetic field. Current-drive and ohmic heating experiments using a center solenoid coil have been conducted on the FAT device [7], and magnetic pumping heating [8] for FRC plasma will be conducted. The quartz tube has high transmissivity from near-ultraviolet to infrared light. Thus, the tube would be useful for observation of the dynamic motion and rethermalization of the translation process. The thermalization of supersonic translation has already been elucidated on the FIX device [9,10] but that of subsonic translation has not yet been investigated. Elucidation of this phenomenon using the equivalent low-energy neutral beam injection [11] is a future project for the FAT device.
II. DEVELOPED FRC DEVICE
The FAT device is divided into two sections: a theta-pinch formation region and an oblate confinement region. Figure 1 shows a schematic view of the FAT device and the axial component of the magnetic field on the geometrical axis. An FRC is formed by the FRTP method and translated into the confinement region by the interconnected external magnetic field gradient shown in Fig. 1. The FRC expands radially in the first pass in the translation process and settles with radial shrinking in the low-elongation chamber after a number of reflections by magnetic mirrors.
The confinement vessels for FRC translation experiments are usually made of stainless steel [3,4,7,8,12]; however, in the case of our FAT experiments, a fused transparent quartz tube with an outer diameter of 0.8 m and a length of 1 m is employed as a confinement vessel. The transparent quartz tube, with a thickness of 4 mm and a smooth surface, enables us to observe the radiation and apply a high-frequency magnetic field from outside the chamber. Each end of the tube is connected to the main body by a conical stainless steel housing of 4 mm thickness. These conical sections function as flux conservers during the FRC reflection process. The three sets of capacitor banks listed in Table I are connected in parallel to the theta-pinch coils through a couple of two parallel collector plates. The main compression magnetic field must rise faster than the magnetic diffusion time and particle diffusion time of a few microseconds. To reduce the total inductance in the main compression circuit, the transmission path is composed of 215 coaxial cables. Note that a set of bias banks is connected in series with an inductor of ∼1.8 μH, which produces a quasi-steady magnetic field, and limits excessive currents into the bias banks from the main compression and pre-ionization capacitor banks. The main compression magnetic field decays exponentially, with a time constant of 90 μs, as the result of a crowbar circuit. A fused quartz tube of 0.256 m in outer diameter and 2 m in length is surrounded by theta-pinch coils made of cast copper. The width and thickness of the theta-pinch coil are 50 mm and 15 mm, respectively. The theta-pinch coils are arranged divergently to form a magnetic field gradient, with coil elements with varying inner diameters of 300, 320, 340, and 360 mm, as shown in Fig. 1.
The experimentally evaluated magnetic diffusion time constant in the metallic conical chambers is 2 ms. The rise time of the confinement magnetic field is typically longer than 10 ms. With the exception of the end mirror coils, the confinement magnetic field coils are wound on bobbins, which have a toroidal cut to prevent leading eddy current. A shift (toroidal mode number n = 1) motion, potentially with poloidal modes, towards the cut occurs in the translation process. Together with the axial translation at the velocity range of 100–200 km/s, magnetic fluctuation because of the radially shift motion with respect to the apparatus coordinate system is in a micro-second of time scale. To suppress the magnetic flux leakage from the cut due to the plasma injection, two copper sheets of 1 mm thickness are placed inside the coil bobbins. Each sheet is electrically isolated and both ends are superposed. With the copper sheets, the shift motion has not been observed. The coil bobbins, which are aligned on a set of two parallel rails, are adjustable along the z-axis. The inner diameter of the four bobbins in the cylindrical section is 1030 mm, and the respective inner diameters of the three bobbins in each conical section are 900 mm, 800 mm, and 600 mm. Each confinement coil (with a typical inductance in the sub-millihenry range) and the sets of capacitor banks are optionally connected to form a magnetic field profile, such as a central confinement magnetic field and an end-mirror plug. A typical magnetic field profile is shown in Fig. 1. A maximum mirror ratio of 10 is possible in the confinement section. Up-stream mirror field strength is about a half of that of the down-stream mirror field to escape the deceleration of translation velocity.
Deuterium gas is introduced from an electromagnetic valve which is exclusively designed to enable rapid response (less than 0.1 ms) compared with commercially available valves. The deuterium gas flows into the confinement vessel within a few milliseconds of puffing. The time scale of FRC confinement in the FAT experiment is in the order of sub-milliseconds, which is much less than that of deuterium gas flow. A second gas valve may also be installed on the confinement vessel, and employing the two gas valves enables FRC translation into selected neutral gas species (e.g., for shockwave verification) as well as optical imaging for observing specific line emissions. Note that statically filled gas is equivalent to low energy NBI [11] (for example, 100 eV for FRC translation at 100 km/s into deuterium gas).
The measurement instruments installed on the FAT device and typical FRC plasma parameters are shown in Table II. The dynamics of FRC formation and translation are measured by magnetic [13] or optical techniques [14]. A high-speed visible-light camera (ULTRA Cam, HS-106E, nac Image Technology, Inc.) is employed to observe the global behavior of a translating FRC in the FAT device. The highest frame rate of the high-speed camera is 1.25 Mf/s at 360 × 410 pixels. The time scale of the MHD activity of the FRC is in the order of microseconds. The performance of the high-speed camera (e.g., minimum exposure time and maximum number of frames for continuous shooting) is high enough to observe global behavior in the translation process.
III. DEMONSTRATION OF FRC TRANSLATION
The excluded flux radius of the translating FRC in the confinement section is shown in Fig. 2. The FRC is translated with radial expansion and trapped by the mirror magnetic field after a few reflections. The 2–3 elongation of the translated FRC, as estimated from the plasma length of 80 cm and peak diameter of 40–25 cm, classifies it as prolate in shape; however, it is relatively oblate as an FRTP-FRC. The speed of the FRC, in the first pass through the mid-plane of the confinement section, is 150–210 km/s, as estimated by the time of flight method applied to the diamagnetic signals. The Alfvénic velocity at the periphery of the separatrix, as estimated based on the electron density of the translating FRC and external magnetic field, is less than the translation speed.
Figure 3 shows the visible-light images recorded by the high-speed camera. In this case, the vacuum chamber is statically filled with 1 mTorr of deuterium. The boundary between the plasma and vacuum region is clearly distinguishable. The low-elongation FRC in the super-Alfvénic translation process survives without disruptive instability.
IV. SUMMARY
FRC translation experiments were successfully performed on the newly developed, FAT FRC device. The device enables a wide range of controllable translation velocity from 80 to 210 km/s. The transparent dielectric vacuum chamber improves the accessibility of optical measurements. The global behavior of the FRC was observed through the wall of the quartz vessel, by means of a visible-light high-speed camera, and the images evidenced a successful translation process with no significant global deformation or displacement.
The dielectric chamber of the FAT device increases the latitude to perform translation-related experiments, such as those concerning inductive current drive, equivalent NBI effects, and wave applications. These results will be published elsewhere.
Although no pulsed gate coils were employed in this series of experiments, FRC formation and acceleration were successfully performed, similar to experiments involving the NUCTE-III [11,15]. Sets of pulsed gate coils will be installed in the future, to examine the FRC performance depending on the translation speed, especially in the range of subsonic speed to super-Alfvénic speed.
TABLE I. 
Specification of the theta-pinch power supply.
TABLE II. 
Specification of measurement instruments installed on the FAT facility.
TABLE I. -body
	Capacitance (μF)	Voltage (kV)	Rise time (μs)
Main compression	67.5	30	<4
Theta pre-ionization	11.25	25	<3
Bias field	2000	3	100
TABLE II. -body
Instrument	Measuring parameter	Physical parameter	Formation	Confinement
Magnetic pick up coil	Magnetic field	Excluded flux radius	6 cm	15–25 cm
He–Ne laser interferometer	Optical path difference	Electron density	>10^{21} m^{−3}	>10^{20} m^{−3}
Ion Doppler spectrometer	Doppler broadening/Doppler shift	Ion temperature/toroidal flow	200–300 eV/10–40 km/s	30–50 eV/⋯
Optical collimator with a photomultiplier	Emission intensity	…	…	…
FIG. 1. 
Schematic diagram of the FAT device with an external magnetic field guide. The formation section is a conventional theta-pinch region with a set of divergent theta-pinch coils. The inner diameter of the confinement section is roughly three times larger than that of the formation section.
FIG. 2. 
Time evolution of the excluded flux radius (equivalent to separatrix radius) in the translation process into a vacuum.
FIG. 3. 
An FRC translating in statically filled D_{2}. Note that the time scale does not correspond to Fig. 2 and t_{0} is the start time of the high-speed camera because the fast camera was not synchronized with other measurements.
