Electron diffraction and imaging for atom probe tomography
Previous work has shown that pre- and post-experiment quantification of atom probe tomography (APT) specimen geometry using electron microscopy can constrain otherwise unknown parameters, leading to an improvement in data fidelity. To that end, an electron microscopy and diffraction system has been developed for in situ compatibility with modern APT hardware. The system is capable of secondary and backscattered scanning electron imaging, bright field and dark field scanning transmission electron imaging, and scanning transmission electron diffraction. Additionally, the system is also capable of in situ dynamic electron diffraction experiments using laser pulsed heating of the APT specimen.
INTRODUCTION
A full understanding of microscale and nanoscale morphology and structure of materials such as compositional uniformity of dopants or impurities, grain boundary structure and interface abruptness, nucleation and resolidification, and phase transformations is useful to engineer materials for best performance. Measuring these features with high chemical resolution (parts per million, ppm), high spatial resolution (sub-nm), and high temporal resolution (ns) is helpful to understand processing–structure–property relationships. For example, characterizing nucleation and resolidification events requires spatial resolution between 1 nm and 100 nm, with the temporal resolution to identify each event in the range of 1 ps–1000 ps [1].
Currently, several techniques can be correlated to analyze specimens with high spatial and chemical resolution. Information about the specimen internal structure, such as interfaces, precipitate morphology, and crystallography, can be obtained using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Modern TEMs are optimized for high-resolution imaging, making them useful for analysis of materials with nanometer scale features. Atom probe tomography (APT) is a complimentary technique to TEM and uses a needle shaped specimen with a tip radius less than 100 nm and TOF mass spectroscopy to produce a 3D reconstruction of the atomic distribution [2,3]. Both TEM and APT are capable of providing elemental analyses of a specimen with a sub-nanometer spatial resolution [4,5]. Unfortunately, chemical composition analysis in the TEM using energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and/or electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) only provides a sensitivity of approximately 1 at. % although atomic column resolution can be achieved using STEM/EDS [6].
Despite having inherent 3-D spatial information and chemical sensitivity on the order of 10 ppm, APT has challenges with spatial scaling during data reconstruction. In order to produce accurate 3-D reconstructions of the specimen volume analyzed via APT, it is necessary to have accurate knowledge of the specimen such as the material’s temperature dependent evaporation field and the interatomic spacings for each phase analyzed. Accurate reconstructions are nearly impossible to achieve due to assumptions made in the reconstruction routines employed for interpretation of APT results [7–10].
Previous work has demonstrated that it is possible to monitor the specimen geometry ex-situ by transferring the APT specimen to the TEM and back, thus reducing the number of assumptions used during data reconstruction [11,12]. However, this is time consuming due to specimen pumping times to UHV being on the order of days, as well as specimen damage, loss, or contamination during transfer.
This work demonstrates coupling an electron imaging and diffraction system using a dedicated scanning TEM (STEM) integrated into a partially configured APT platform [Cameca (Cameca Instruments, Inc. 5500 Nobel Drive, Madison, WI, USA. Phone: +1 608 4420622. cameca.us-sales@ametek.com) LEAP 4000XSi]. The instrument is capable of in situ S(T)EM imaging of tip shape evolution during a field evaporation experiment, electron diffraction of atom probe specimens to assess phase transformations that could be induced by laser pulsing (heating induced by the laser), and ultimately examination of the specimens following laser annealing experiments.
HARDWARE
Some of the relevant instrumental specifications of current commercial APT instrument designs include a UHV analysis chamber (operating vacuum level about 10^{−11} mbar) with an integrated three-axis positioning specimen stage. Specimen cooling with a temperature range from ∼20 K to room temperature is carried out using a recirculating He cryostat. In addition, a DC voltage source is required with a maximum voltage of 15 kV and pulsing electronics capable of producing voltage pulses with ∼2 ns FWHM in duration and amplitude up to 2000 V with a repetition rate of 200 kHz [13]. A biased position sensitive ion detector capable of achieving nanometer scale resolution in the x-y plane after reconstruction is placed normal to the specimen allowing for ion drift lengths between 90 and 200 mm [4]. The three-axis positioning stage is used for specimen alignment with the local electrode (or aperture) and thus the center of the ion detector [14]. Currently, positioning of the specimen with respect to the local electrode is carried out using two optical cameras, shown in Fig. 1, that can achieve a resolution of a couple of micrometers when the optics are focused on the specimen. If repeatable APT experimental parameters such as field of view and applied voltage are to be achieved, a spatial resolution less than 1 μm is necessary for positioning, which is best achieved with electron microscopy imaging.
The main engineering problem of an in situ electron column is UHV compatibility. Hence, a UHV compatible Schottky field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) column was selected, specifically an e-CLIPSE II manufactured by Orsay Physics (Orsay Physics: 95 Avenue des Monts Auréliens, ZA Saint-Charles, F 13710 Fuveau. Phone : +33 442 538 090. nano@orsayphysics.com). It is a fully electrostatic electron column capable of achieving resolutions of ∼4 nm using a 25 keV accelerating voltage and 35 pA current and a resolution of 80 nm using a 10 nA current. Due to the electrostatic lenses, no magnetic leakage field is generated by the column and interference with the atom probe hardware is minimized. The Schottky field emission electron source and housing were modified with a UHV compatible optical port, allowing external optical viewing and/or laser pulsing of the field emitter.
Three different electron detectors are utilized in the current system, each enabling a different imaging mode to be conducted: (i) an Everhart-Thornley scintillator for secondary electron imaging; (ii) a solid state transmission electron detector (SSD) in a bright field and dark field setup; and (iii) a phosphor detector coupled with a high speed digital camera for forward-scattered diffraction pattern acquisition. The detector locations are shown in Fig. 1. Due to geometrical constraints associated with the stage positioning hardware and cryostat interfering with the objective lens of the electron column, the specimen is positioned a minimum of 14 mm from the objective lens pole piece. According to documents provided by the manufacturer, a spatial resolution of ∼8 nm can be expected under this configuration, with shorter working distances improving the resolution.
In situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM) has been explored previously for monitoring an atom probe specimen during field evaporation [15], albeit with different specimen stages, no local electrode, and not including electron diffraction capabilities. It was noted by the authors that SE imaging of an atom probe specimen while under bias requires compensating for the interactions between the applied field and the charge electrons. The instrument described here did not include such compensation, although it could be incorporated through control of the scan generator. An example scanning mode secondary electron micrograph acquired in the current system illustrates an atom probe specimen aligned with the local electrode inside the APT analysis chamber as shown in Fig. 2.
Integration of the electron column and secondary electron detector inside the analysis chamber is challenging since electromagnetic field interference from the electron column and detector is expected. Additionally, the presence of APT instrumentation hardware in close proximity to the specimen results in a high amount of SEII and SEIII electron generation [16]. Indications of field interference were observed during imaging with secondary electrons and without an applied specimen bias, most likely due to charging of the specimen during electron imaging. Example images for a TEM specimen aligned with the local electrode illustrates this effect [Fig. 2(a)], but was much diminished for an atom probe specimen [Fig. 2(b)]. If reliably reproducible, direct imaging of the electric field surrounding the specimen and local electrode may be used to understand ion trajectories during APT experiments. Electron contrast illustrating the field most likely results from the interaction of SEII and SEIII signals with the electric field around the specimen. Contrast is generated when the primary electron beam is scanning away from the specimen but interacting with the stage hardware and producing secondary electrons, which are re-directed toward the electron detector. It is likely that imaging of the electric field between the specimen and local electrode is also occurring although the electron column does not have the necessary spatial resolution in the SE imaging mode to directly observe the electric field.
A representative secondary electron (SE) image of an APT specimen mounted to a TEM half grid is shown in Fig. 3(a). Applying a 500 V bias applied between the specimen and the local electrode results in the SE image in Fig. 3(b). Several changes are observed between the two images. Notably, the image shifts and distorts due to effects noted by Larson, et_al [15] Additionally, there are significant contrast changes due to the applied bias. The positively biased specimen and TEM half grid lose signal and become dark, presumably due to attracting the low energy secondary electrons. Contrarily, the negatively biased local electrode has increased signal due to a larger secondary electron yield. Notably, this bias is small compared with APT analysis conditions, leading to the projection that monitoring the specimen during APT analysis is not feasible using 25 keV electrons.
Electron diffraction detection hardware in this system was conceptualized based on current SEM electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) hardware. It has been noted [1] that phosphor screens coupled with CCD cameras are most applicable for electron energies below 30 keV. Therefore, a phosphor detector was chosen for forward-scattered diffraction mapping of the specimen. Specifically, a short persistence phosphor coating (P-22, composition ZnS:Cu, Al) was applied to a Kodial^{TM} leaded glass (for x-ray absorption) zero length UHV viewport (NW63CF) with a viewing diameter of 63 mm and placed in the optic axis of the electron column 210 mm from the specimen plane. P-22 coating is specified for high brightness and a decay time of 1-100 ms. Detector placement was achieved by adding a custom length con-flat extension to a flange on the analysis chamber as indicated in Fig. 1. Pattern acquisition is completed using a CCD camera placed outside of the vacuum with a 25 mm fixed focal length objective f/1.4 lens capable of imaging the entire phosphor screen at an object distance of 100 mm. The CCD camera is similar to those currently used in many commercial SEM EBSD systems due to high acquisition rates (readout speeds of 20 and 40 MHz), peak efficiency in the 500-600 nm range of the spectrum, and 1.4 Megapixel resolution. Shrouding between the diffraction pattern and the camera was necessary in order to reduce noise from ambient light. A shutter is used to block electrons from reaching the diffraction detector while not in use; it also serves as a convenient mounting position for the SSD. This prevents detector burn in and blocks stray light, which would create noise in the SE image, from entering the analysis chamber. An example of a diffraction pattern for a B = [1¯11] obtained for the aluminum specimen imaged in Fig. 2(a) using semi-convergent illumination is shown in Fig. 4 and the major reflections are labeled.
Pattern acquisition and indexing process is automated and performed using a commercially available software package EDAX (EDAX, Inc. 91 McKee Drive, Mahwah, NJ, USA. Phone: +1 201 5294880. info.edax@ametek.com) TSL OIM^{TM}. Control of the electron column steering lenses can be completed using the TSL OIM software, enabling automated crystallographic x-y mapping of the APT specimen. Pattern indexing can be performed during or post-data collection and d-spacing resolutions of 0.06 Å have been achieved under parallel illumination conditions. With no post-specimen electron optics, the rotation orientation of the specimen and the diffraction pattern are maintained and rotation calibration is not needed. Since the electron diffraction pattern is collected normal to the analysis axis, the 3-D orientation of the specimen crystallography is obtained relative to the APT data. In this case, the aluminum APT specimen is oriented with the {111} planes 5° from the analysis axis (in the y-axis of the MCP ion detector).
Diffraction experiments are performed at the maximum accelerating voltage of the electron column, 25 keV in this case, to minimize plural scattering and improve spatial resolution of the diffraction pattern. At 25 keV for a phosphor detector with 63 mm diameter and a maximum camera length of 210 mm, detection of Bragg scattered electrons is possible for a range of interatomic spacings. Figure 5 shows the estimated range of atomic plane spacing (d-spacing) for a given detector size or radius. The d-spacings for several representative crystal structures consisting of Al (face centered cubic, FCC), Si (diamond cubic), Mn (body centered cubic, BCC), and Zn (hexagonal closed packed, HCP) that can be captured in the phosphor detector with the current design are shown. It can be seen that the reflections of high order planes can still be captured within the detector radius.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The concept of an atom probe coupled with a STEM has received attention in the past decade as a potential important development in microscopy [17]. The realization of a combination instrument will require that the operating modes of two complex instruments be explored in a systematic way. This is the first time that imaging and diffraction have been combined with all of the components of an atom probe except the position-sensitive detector. Subsequent practical applications of this hardware development will include monitoring the tip shape evolution during an atom probe experiment. Nearly real time feedback can be used to tune APT data collection parameters and specimen geometries needed for data reconstruction. Tip shape changes can be performed using secondary electron imaging, such as the micrograph shown in Fig. 2(b), albeit with limited spatial resolution. Information about the specimen morphology can also be obtained using a solid-state transmission electron detector (SSD) for bright-field (BF) and dark-field (DF) imaging. Any inhomogeneities—e.g., changes in grain orientation, the presence of precipitates, etc.—in the specimen will cause electrons to Bragg scatter at different angles, so such contrast will be captured by the DF detector. However, due to the limited spatial resolution of the electron microscopy hardware, standard SE, Backscattered Electron (BSE), and STEM micrographs may not have enough information to completely inform the APT reconstruction with any improvement in data fidelity.
Both imaging and diffraction information can be directly utilized in the APT data reconstruction methodology. Electron diffraction allows the direct quantification of interplanar spacings, a parameter that, when used in the APT reconstruction process, is assumed a priori. Quantification of the interplanar spacings with respect to the specimen axis can also improve the overall reconstruction fidelity due to accurate interatomic spacings input to the reconstruction algorithms. Further improvements to the diffraction pattern collection system’s signal to noise would improve the ability to quantify interplanar spacings and even determine 3-D space groups and lattice orientations using convergent beam diffraction techniques. Potential detection systems may include CMOS arrays with improved dynamic ranges over phosphor screens by factors of 100 or more. Such a detector would also allow for the implementation of STEM ptychography, where Angstrom spatial resolutions have been demonstrated with spot sizes larger than 8 nm, a size achievable using the current hardware configuration and 14 mm working distance [18].
Atom probe specimens have an extremely small thermal mass that allows for laser induced thermal pulsing from ∼20 K to ∼1600 K in nominally 50 ps [5,19,20]. Temperature increases can be induced in the APT specimens by varying laser pulse energy whereas the specimen holder and stage act as heat sinks and are typically set at cryogenic temperatures. Thermal cycling depends on laser fluence, laser absorption, thermal diffusivity, and specimen geometry [21–23]. The onset of physical processes such as diffusion across an interface can be “frozen in” at specific time intervals. Diffraction patterns can be acquired after laser irradiation but prior to atom probe field evaporation to characterize any changes in crystallography. The specimen is subsequently analyzed using the atom probe for spatial changes in chemistry.
As shown in recent work, a model system consisting of the ZnMgO:Ga epitaxial transparent conducting oxide (TCO) thin film with nominal composition Zn_{0.70}Mg_{0.29}Ga_{0.01}O on c-oriented sapphire (α-Al_{2}O_{3}) [24] was chosen to demonstrate the temporal capability of the instrument described herein [25]. It was shown that laser heating of the specimen can induce diffusion and phase transformations in an APT specimen and that the small geometry of the APT specimen allows for specimen cooling rates on the order of 10^{13} K/s. A single atomic diffusion event was shown to occur every 10 000 thermal cycles. Improvements to the repetition rate of diffraction pattern collection to ∼100 000 frames per second would lead to direct measurements of phase transformations with ns temporal resolution and, when combined with APT, atomic scale spatial resolution.
CONCLUSIONS
The implementation of an in situ scanning electron column, electron diffraction pattern collection, and imaging detectors within a UHV, partially assembled APT instrument has been illustrated. Imaging and diffraction analysis of a specimen in the APT analysis position are demonstrated. Transmission electron diffraction experiments for quantification of the specimen crystallography and interatomic spacings with respect to the analysis axes have been demonstrated. Secondary electron imaging with the specimen under bias at field emission levels is not currently possible due to image distortions and changes in secondary electron yields. In situ electron microscopy will enable future APT/STEM experimental techniques such as electron ptychography and may also enable new APT experimental techniques and reconstruction methodologies.
FIG. 1. 
Schematic of the STEM/APT instrument showing the position of the alignment cameras and the electron column in the analysis chamber and the interior of the analysis chamber showing the specimen puck holder, local electrode, secondary electron detector, and electron column pole piece. The working distance of the electron column is 14 mm in the current setup.
FIG. 2. 
Secondary electron micrograph of (a) a TEM specimen aligned with the local electrode inside the analysis chamber. Charging from imaging occurred and the field concentration between the local electrode and specimen is evident. (b) shows an atom probe specimen aligned with the local electrode.
FIG. 3. 
Secondary electron micrograph of (a) an atom probe specimen mounted to a half TEM grid and located in the APT analysis position with no applied bias. (b) The same specimen under the same conditions but with the 500 V applied between the specimen and the local electrode. Application of a moderate bias results in image shift, distortion, and contrast changes.
FIG. 4. 
Electron diffraction pattern from an aluminum specimen acquired using the maximum accelerating voltage (25 keV). The condenser lens strength was set to zero and the beam was focused using only the objective lens in order to obtain maximum beam convergence at the specimen with a high convergence angle.
FIG. 5. 
Calculation of the atomic plane spacing (d-spacing) for Al, Si, Mn, and Zn specimens that can be captured within the detector radius. Modeled specimen data represent materials with different crystal structures and lattice parameters. The camera length is 210 mm and the maximum detector radius is 32 mm. The approximate d-spacings for various planes are indicated for reference.
