Treatment of SU-8 surfaces using atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier discharge plasma
Dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma was used to change the wettability of a SU-8 photoresist, reducing the contact angle and improving the surface smoothness. As most polymers, SU-8 has hydrophobic surfaces which prevents the adhesion of biological samples when used to fabricate biochemical sensors. Here, DBD Plasma treatment was conducted over the SU-8 surface, reducing the contact angle from 78° to 12°. The advantage of this treatment is that the SU-8 surface maintains the hydrophilic surface behavior over 24 h time period. DBD plasma modified the SU-8 surface wettability under low temperature variation and does not cause great irregularities on the surface. The highest value of root mean square surface roughness after 10 min exposure was 2.9 ± 0.3 nm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Polymers offer various advantages over silicon technology in order to produce biosensors, not only considering the economic factors, but also the bioavailability, flexibility in microfabrication, and low toxicity. Some biosensor devices are capable to execute multiple functions commonly performed by many technicians in a laboratory, everything in a small substrate. These kinds of biosensors are called lab-on-a-chip devices, and offer portability, high sensibility, fast, and label free analysis [1]. The last advances in this area involve the production of photonics biosensors in lab-on-a-chip devices, with the ability to detect samples in a range of some nanograms or even picograms per milliliters [2].
The SU-8 has been widely used as a structural material for lab-on-chip devices [3,4]. SU-8 is an epoxy-based polymer used as a negative tone resist in a liquid phase state, which allows a great number of applications considering its simple manipulation. SU-8 has excellent characteristics such as thermal and chemical stability, biocompatibility, and transparency to visible light. It is also suitable for building high-aspect-ratio structures with high mechanical robustness [5,6]. Besides, SU-8 presents high optical performance with low losses and offers a relatively high optical refractive index. With these characteristics combined with low cost, SU-8 presents a good strategy to produce photonics biosensors [7]. Regardless of those advantages, a serious issue for use of SU-8 in bioanalytical applications is related to its hydrophobic surface and the tendency to absorb specific bioanalytes [8–11].
Different types of processes for SU-8 surface modifications have been explored to control its hydrophobicity characteristics (surface contact angle of approximately 80°) using wet chemicals, ultraviolet (UV) light and ozone, and plasma treatment [12–15]. All of these methods aim at creating functional groups on the polymer surface, promoting the reduction of the contact angle, and consequently increasing its wettability and surface energy [16–20].
A successful wet chemical process used to change the hydrophobicity of SU-8 is the immersion in ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN) etchant, a solution used to etch chromium films in MEMS applications. The samples with SU-8 are immersed in a diluted CAN solution under temperature control followed by an ethanolamine immersion to modify the surface. This procedure results in a reduction of the SU-8 contact angle down to 10°, stable for a few days. Despite being a simple procedure with great results, CAN solution leaves a cerium monolayer film on the SU-8 surface [8,14]. This presence could be toxic for many biological applications.
Another example of surface treatment employs an UV source in an ozone-rich environment to generate a hydrophilic surface. The contact angle can be reduced from 78° to 12° through proper control of the UV power source, ozone concentration, and processing time. Ultraviolet sources with different wavelengths can be used and good results in terms of roughness have been reported with this technique [13,21].
Plasma procedures are also commonly used to modify SU-8 surface. Argon and oxygen plasmas have been applied to change SU-8 wettability [14,22–25]. Walther et_al compared the results of SU-8 processing using two kinds of plasmas: a low temperature atmospheric pressure argon plasma produced by microwaves and an oxygen plasma produced by a low frequency RF source [14]. After the argon plasma treatment, the SU-8 surface presented a contact angle of 30° and lower stability when compared to the oxygen plasma, with the contact angle changing to 52° after 5 days of storage. On the other hand, oxygen plasma treatment presented the contact angle below 10° after just 8 min of processing. After 5 days, the samples treated by oxygen plasma presented some variation in the contact angle, but the surfaces were still hydrophilic, with the contact angle lower than 20° [14,23].
Alternatively, other types of plasma that are used to modify hydrophobic polymer surfaces could also offer a solution to SU-8. Atmospheric pressure plasma jets (APPJ) produced in open environments have been used to treat a wide variety of materials, organic and inorganic, like wood, metals, and polymers [16,26–28]. These kinds of plasma have some advantages over the vacuum ones, such as lower implementation costs, higher versatility, and no need of vacuum systems [26,29,30]. There is a work reporting the use of microwave atmospheric pressure plasma, operated with argon gas, to treat SU-8 samples [14].
Another important parameter to be considered in many applications, especially bioanalytical, is the surface roughness. SU-8 has a very smooth surface after spin coating, usually below 0.50 nm root mean square (RMS). Roughness is a critical parameter for nanophotonic biosensors because very small damages in nanometric structures such as waveguides cause increased loses for the propagating light. Among the procedures presented earlier, oxygen plasma treatment shows more roughness than the others, even though hydrophilicity is also more stable, which means that the SU-8 surface remains hydrophilic for five days after storage, maintaining a low contact angle of 20° [14].
Considering this scenario, we proposed the use of a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) atmospheric pressure plasma as an option for SU-8 surface treatment. Our focus is the use of SU-8 photoresist for optical applications, such as nanophotonic waveguides for bioanalytical detections. Our plasma treatments were performed using an APPJ obtained from a DBD device operated with helium gas. We note that the use of a DBD plasma jet for treatment of SU-8 surfaces has some advantages over the RF plasma treatment because it reduces the SU-8 surface roughness if the process duration is adequately chosen [25,31]. The DBD plasma treatment does not introduce bubbles-like irregularities (buckling) on the SU-8 surface for short-time exposure due to its low temperature.
We show the contact angle evolution under different plasma treatment durations and measure for how long the surface remains hydrophilic. Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), the SU-8 surface roughness was characterized, showing that we were able to reach around 0.21 nm RMS with 2 min plasma treatment, actually decreasing the original value of 0.44 nm surface roughness. X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) was used to characterize the chemical changes over the SU-8 surface, before and after DBD plasma treatment. The temperature variation over SU-8 surface was also estimated (see supplementary material) [37], showing that DBD plasma offer a low thermal load and do not cause any damage to the SU-8 sample due to heating.
II. EXPERIMENT
A. SU-8 sample preparation
Silicon wafer substrates were first cleaned using standard Piranha (H_{2}SO_{4} + H_{2}O_{2}, 4:1) bath, followed by an hydrofluoric acid dip for 30 s to remove native oxides. After that, an RCA cleaning process (NH_{4}OH + H_{2}O_{2} + H_{2}O and HCl + H_{2}O_{2} + H_{2}O) cleaning was performed. Finally, the wafers were rinsed in deionized water, blown dried with N_{2}, and heated in an oven at 200 °C for 2 h. The silicon samples were coated with a solution of 10 ml of SU-8 2100 (composed by 75% solid) diluted in 27.5 ml of cyclopentanone. The reduced viscosity of the resist allowed us to obtain a 1 μm thick film by spin coating at 3000 RPM for 30 s. They were then prebaked for 1 min at 65 °C and 3 min at 95 °C. After a slow cooling to environmental temperature (21 °C), the 1 cm^{2} samples were exposed to UV using a Tamarack Contact Printer with a 365 nm wavelength sources and energy of 150 mJ. The samples were postbaked at 65 and 95 °C for 1 min each, and finally developed for 60 s in SU-8 Developer, rinsed with isopropyl alcohol for 10 s, and blown dried with N_{2}.
B. DBD plasma
SU-8 samples were then processed with the DBD plasma under different conditions as described on sequence. The experimental setup used to treat SU-8 samples with the DBD plasma is shown in Fig. 1. The basic operation of the device is as follows: a continuous gas flow is injected inside the poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) tube and high-voltage pulses are applied to the electrode inside the glass tube. Due to the size of the PVC opening (10 mm), the working gas interacts with the surrounding ambient air and when the high voltage (HV) is turned on, an initial plasma discharge is formed in the region between the glass tube and the PVC tube producing a plasma jet that leaves the tube through opening. The resulting plasma is composed by excited and ionized species—atoms and molecules—and can be used for surface treatment. One of the features of the DBD plasma device used in this work is that it does not require a second electrode around the PVC tube to produce the plasma jet. Even if we remove the ground electrode, we still have a plasma jet leaving the PVC tube opening.
An initial plasma discharge is formed in the region between the glass tube and the PVC tube producing a plasma jet that exits the tube through a 10 mm opening and can be used for surface treatment. For the treatment of SU-8 surfaces, we used helium as the working gas at a flow rate of 3.2 l/min. The gas temperature was estimated to be T_{g} = (375 ± 25) K, and the vibrational temperature T_{v} = (2800 ± 50) K. These temperatures were determined using a well-known method based on optical emission spectroscopy, using light emissions from the second positive system of N_{2} molecules—C ^{3}Π_{u} → B ^{3}Π_{g} transitions of N_{2} I—in the wavelength range from ∼365 to 385 nm [32,33]. A pulsed HV signal with 15 kV of amplitude and 1 μs width operated at 60 Hz repetition rate produces a plasma with approximately 80 mW of power. The distance between the PVC tube exit and the SU-8 sample was 3 mm, and the dimensions of samples were approximately 10 × 10 mm^{2}. We used a dielectric material plate (PVC) as the sample holder, and since it is an electrical insulating material between the active electrode and the ground one, the sample formed by the SU-8 film deposited over the Si substrate (Si is an electrical conducting) acts as a floating electrode in this configuration.
C. Characterization
The contact angles were measured before and after the DBD plasma treatment using a CCD camera and deionized water droplets with volume controlled by syringe. The images were processed using the ImageJ software. The surface roughness was evaluated by AFM microscope NT-MDT, Ntegra-Spectra UV solid-state laser (473 nm) 50 mW, resolution of 300–450 nm. The chemical elements over surface were analyzed by a K-alpha x-ray spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Contact angle and recovery time
The first test was conducted with the intent to observe the surface modifications in SU-8 after DBD plasma treatment over different exposure times. In Fig. 2, we show that the contact angle decreases as the exposure time increases. Maximal angle reduction was observed with an exposure of 8 min, driving the angle from 78° down to 12°.
The results of all tested exposures are plotted in Fig. 3(a), where it can be seen that the contact angle with the SU-8 surface decreases to 20° in less than 1 min of exposure and the minimum angle achieved is slightly above 10°. Figure 3(b) shows the recovery curve for the contact angle as a function of aging time; the contact angle recovery is fast in the first 5 min but slows down after about 20 min and the surface remains hydrophilic (angle below 45°) for the full 72 h of testing.
B. Surface roughness
Scans from the AFM surface analysis of three samples are presented in Figs. 4(a)–4(c): SU-8 sample before plasma treatment, after 2 min treatment, and after 10 min treatment, respectively.
We notice that with 2 min of treatment the process seems to reduce the scale of large variations on the surface while possibly introducing new smaller scale features. That leads to an overall reduction in RMS surface roughness from 0.44 nm before treatment to 0.212 nm after 2 min exposure, as indicated in Table I.
This roughness reduction has not been observed in other experiments with RF plasma treatments [23,25] and, together with the contact angle results, represents a definite advantage for the proposed DBD plasma process. Nonetheless, an excessive exposure (10 min) causes the appearance of large amplitude irregularities (bubbles-like irregularities) on the SU-8 surface, in a way similar to that observed in other works [23].
C. XPS analysis
In Fig. 5, the XPS spectra for SU-8 before processing (a) and after DBD plasma processing (b) are shown. The XPS spectrum without plasma presents oxygen and carbon as the most representative peaks on SU-8 surface composition. After DBD plasma treatment, the changes in survey spectra are visible: a reduction of the peak of carbon, with a respective increase of the oxygen.
More detailed XPS spectra of samples before and after plasma treatment, in regions near C 1s and O 1s peaks, are shown in Fig. 6, together with their respective deconvolution results. For the C 1s region, the ratio between intensities of C-C and C-H bindings at 284.7 eV and C-O bindings at 286.1 eV does not practically change (variation within 5%) after plasma processing although in some other works some increase of C-O peaks was reported [14,34,35].
For the O1s region, for the untreated SU-8 sample the main peak observed is C-O peak at 532.7 eV. After treatment, additional peaks can be seen at 540.9 and 531.1 eV. Both peaks can be assigned to antimony oxide that is a component related to a photoacid activator in a SU-8 photoresist and the appearance of these peaks was reported in various works where SU-8 was treated by different plasmas [14,32,36]. The peak near 531.1 eV can also be partially assigned to C=O bindings appeared due to treatment; however, the spectral resolution does not allow to separate the contributions from antimony oxide and C=O group [14,23,31].
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we have shown that atmospheric pressure plasma jet produced by DBD can be used for the treatment of SU-8 surfaces with successful promotion of wettability as well as an overall reduction in the surface roughness depending on the exposure time. The XPS spectra indicate some changes in the composition of the surface layers of the SU-8 resist, in particular, appearance of a peak related to antimony oxide as was also observed in other studies with different plasma sources used for the SU-8 treatment. The DBD plasma treatment reduces the large irregularities on the surface and, due to its low temperature; it does not introduce bubbles-like irregularities on the SU-8 surface for short-time exposure. It is also important to note that the DBD plasma produces long-lived surface changes that were verified observing the contact angle recovery as a function of aging time.
Table I. 
RMS surface roughness (R_{q}) of the SU-8 samples.
Table I. -body
Exposure time (min)	R_{q} (nm)
0	0.44 ± 0.04
2	0.212 ± 0.012
10	2.9 ± 0.3
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) Scheme of the DBD device and setup used for plasma treatment of SU-8 samples. Φe and Φi refer to external and internal diameters, respectively. Elements are out of scale.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Water droplets on SU-8 samples for characterization of contact angles. (a) Before DBD plasma exposure the contact angle is 78°. (b) The angle decreases to 26° after 15 s of exposure and (c) to 12° after 8 min.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) Quantitative contact angle characterization. (a) Measured contact angle for different exposure intervals of DBD plasma treatment. (b) Recovery curve for the contact angle after 2 min exposure.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) AFM images of SU-8. (a) Sample not treated; (b) sample treated for 2 min; and (c) sample treated for 10 min.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) XPS survey spectra of SU-8: (a) sample not treated and (b) sample treated with DBD plasma over 10 min.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) Analysis on the high-resolution XPS spectra: (a) and (b) show the C1s peaks for untreated and treated SU-8 surface, respectively, and (c) and (d) show the O1s peaks for untreated and treated SU-8 surface with DBD plasma.
