Development of copper electroformed vacuum chambers with integrated non-evaporable getter thin film coatings
First results concerning a new approach of TiZrV non-evaporable getter (NEG) thin films coating on very small diameter vacuum chambers are presented. This new process is based on the electroforming of a vacuum chamber around a sacrificial mandrel, which is precoated with a NEG thin film. Aluminum was selected as the material of the mandrel and magnetron sputtering deposition for the coating. To improve the quality of the NEG coating, different coating layer sequences were applied and tested. The NEG activation was characterized by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Data from flat samples prepared with the new technique were compared with those produced by the common magnetron sputtering method. Afterward, vacuum chambers equipped with flanges were produced. In addition to the XPS characterization, pumping speed measurements were performed. The results show CO pumping speeds comparable with the ones measured on a standard NEG coated vacuum chamber. However, H_{2} pumping speed exhibits ten times lower values than expected for standard NEG.
I. INTRODUCTION
The trend of electron accelerators toward higher energy and/or brightness at a reasonable cost has a common approach of reducing as much as possible the size of the steering magnets and their magnet bore in which the vacuum chamber is inserted. From the vacuum technology point of view, this trend implies smaller diameter beam pipes and, consequently, lower gas conductance [1,2]. The problem of removing gas in such high aspect-ratio beam pipes is circumvented by coating the inner wall of the vacuum chamber with a nonevaporable getter (NEG) thin film [3–5], which ensures distributed pumping speed and very low beam-induced desorption. NEG coatings transform a vacuum chamber from a gas source into a pump after activation performed during a standard in situ bake-out.
The NEG coating is deposited by sputtering. However, the application of this deposition technique is not straightforward in small cross section tubes whose lengths are several meters. The practical limit is about 8–10 mm diameter, due to the difficulty of maintaining a stable plasma around the axial wire cathode. In addition, beam pipes that have noncylindrical shapes require specific developments [6]. Studies to coat vacuum chambers with a diameter as low as 4 mm by magnetron sputtering are still in progress [7,8]; the development focuses mostly on the application of high power impulse magnetron sputtering. However, the vacuum properties of the coating, i.e., gas sticking probability and maximum gas capacity, are not yet fully assessed.
A new approach is described hereafter. It relies on copper electroforming to build the vacuum chamber onto a predeposited NEG coating; this method is referred hereafter as inverse NEG coating. Copper electroforming is used extensively in the production of high-purity copper components [9–11]. However, the transfer of a reactive film to electroformed components has never been tried before. The main steps of the production process for this type of coatings are the preparation of a mandrel, the mandrel thin-film coating by DC magnetron sputtering, the electroforming of the vacuum chamber onto the coated mandrel, and the removal of the mandrel without damaging the thin film. In principle, such a scheme can be adapted to any geometry for which a mandrel can be manufactured.
This study considers also the deposition of protecting films to provide the NEG coating with good adherence and ensure its pumping performance. Surface analysis by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) enables following the variation of the surface composition during the NEG activation process [12–15]. The impact of protecting films on morphology, grain size, surface reactivity, and pumping performance is presented.
II. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
A. Mandrel preparation, coating, and assembly procedure
In the first step of the production, an aluminum mandrel is coated with a NEG thin film and then, onto the NEG, with a copper film that guarantees the adherence of electroplated copper.
The mandrels were constructed from aluminum W-1050 (99.5% purity). Two 150-mm diameter, 6-mm thick, DC magnetron sputtering sources were used. The first source (equiatomic Ti-Zr-V alloy cathode) was needed to deposit a 1.5‐μm thick TiZrV layer. The second cathode was made of oxygen-free electronic grade copper (OFE) and it was used to deposit a 3‐μm thick layer of the same material. A cathode–substrate distance of 200 mm with an average power of 380 and 365 W for copper and NEG, respectively, was applied. Kr was used as sputtering process gas at a working pressure of about 7 × 10^{−4} mbar. The vacuum system was not baked before the coating and a pressure of 5 × 10^{−7} mbar was achieved at the end of the pump-down. During the coating, the temperature of the substrate was not controlled and no external heating was applied.
Two different mandrel geometries were tested: flat plates of 15 × 15 cm, 0.5 mm thickness, referenced as F; and tubes of 8 cm diameter, 20 cm long and 0.5 mm thick referenced as T. Before coating, the mandrel samples were degreased in detergent solution for 30 min with ultrasonic agitation. The flat samples were positioned in a mobile holder on top of the coating targets, while a combined rotational and translational axis was installed to move the tubular substrates above the cathode targets.
In Fig. 1, a scheme of the process for flat and tubular samples is represented. Two thin-film coating sequences were studied: Cu/NEG/mandrel and Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel. Both were performed without venting step between Cu and NEG coatings. The latter coating sequence was set with the goal of protecting the NEG coating from impurities contained in the mandrel; this point is clarified in Sec. III.
Then, in the second step, the “F” and “T” samples were Cu electroplated in copper-sulfate bath (Cu 40 g/l, H_{2}SO_{4} 100 ml/l) using a commercial brightener to increase smoothness. The applied current density was 200–300 A/m^{2} in direct mode to achieve the Cu thickness of 2.5 mm. After the electroforming, a ring was cut from the tubes for characterization. Afterward, the electrodeposited tubes were electron-beam welded to a copper insert brazed in a standard stainless-steel ConFlat flange.
Finally, flat samples and assembled tubes underwent chemical etching to remove the aluminum mandrel. NaOH, 200 g/l solution, was used to remove the aluminum mandrel. When applicable, either ammonium persulfate 100 g/l or chromic acid 80 g/l was used to remove the protective copper layer originally sandwiched between the mandrel and the NEG film. All chemical etchings were performed at room temperature.
The composition, surface thermal activation, and morphology of the resulting NEG films were measured. In addition, the assembled tubes were characterized by pumping speed measurement to qualify the functional performance of the coating.
B. Sample characterization
Coating imaging was carried out using secondary electron microscopy (SEM). Bulk composition was assessed by energy-dispersive x-ray spectrometry (EDX) using a 10 kV incident electron beam. The coating morphology and crystalline structure were studied by x-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). XRD measurements were carried out using 5° incidence angle Cu Kα radiation (step size was 0.02° and 3 s per step). NEG coating adhesion after mandrel removal was measured according to ASTM D3359-B with adhesive tape on a cross-hatched surface and showed a classification of 5B (no traces of delamination) for both types of coating sequences.
The surface composition of the coating was measured using XPS [Model Phoibos—150 (MCD 9), from SPECS]. The spectra were acquired with the monochromatic excitation photon source of 1486.7 eV (Al Kα), with an energy resolution of 0.1 eV and a normal emission angle from the sample. An average of five scans was recorded per element, with pass energy of 30 eV, with a total duration of 2.5 min per element. Heating the sample in the XPS setup was achieved by radiation from a filament. The NEG coatings were first analyzed in the as-received state (after air exposure) and then after each in situ heating for 1 h at 160, 200, and 250 °C. The pressure in the system was about 10^{−9} mbar and increased up to 10^{−8} mbar during the sample heating. Two samples were simultaneously heated and measured [6].
The pumping speeds were measured by means of a standard Fisher–Mommsen dome [16] which was pumped by a turbo-molecular system (14 l/s effective pumping speed for H_{2}). The assembled sample tube was mounted on a dedicated dome opening. The bake-out of the system was performed for 24 h at temperatures between 200 and 350 °C, depending on the position, with the exception of the sample tube, which was kept at 80 °C. Subsequently, the temperature of the sample tube was increased up to a selected value between 180 and 280 °C for 24 h. The first step in the bake-out removes water vapor and contaminations from the dome's inner walls, without activating the NEG film which otherwise would pump the desorbed gas. The second step aims at activating the NEG film. The base pressure at room temperature, 24 h after the bake-out, was of the order of 10^{−10} mbar. Pumping speeds of H_{2} and then CO were then measured.
III. RESULTS
A. Coating characterization
1. Cu/NEG/mandrel coating sequence
The surface composition of as-received samples was measured by XPS, and the data are listed in Table I. The composition of the NEG film varies slightly between the different coating runs. All coatings exhibit a surface contamination of iron, while flat samples additionally contain traces of sodium.
The amount of carbon measured on as-received samples indicates the degree of cleanliness of the coating after removal of the mandrel [16]. NEG surfaces exposed to air are considered as sufficiently clean from hydrocarbon contamination if carbon concentration (at. %) is below 40% as measured by XPS. All coatings shown in Table I are below that value.
SEM observations of the NEG surface after the mandrel removal are presented in Fig. 2. As expected from XPS, iron (small particles) and sodium precipitates (large crystals) are observed on the NEG surface. The NEG layer topography, after aluminum removal exhibits the mandrel morphology.
The data indicate that Fe and Na contaminations could result from impurities in the aluminum mandrel (with a nominal content of Fe less than 0.4 wt. %) and the use of the NaOH for the etching. Both contaminants can be avoided if the NEG film is not directly coated on the mandrel.
2. Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel coating sequence
To avoid the direct contact between the NEG coating and the mandrel, an intermediate copper layer was coated between them.
The surface composition values of as-received samples are reported in Table II. Once the mandrel has been removed, two different solutions were used to dissolve the protective copper layer: chromic acid or ammonium persulfate. All coatings etched with chromic acid (#.CA in Table II) present between 5% and 10% atomic concentration of chromium on the NEG surface. For samples etched with ammonium persulfate (#.APS in Table II), no impurity was found on the NEG surface. In all cases, Fe and Na are below the XPS detection limit. This coating sequence provides clean NEG surfaces which are comparable to those produced by the standard coating process.
SEM images of the NEG surface morphology after copper etching with ammonium persulfate are presented in Fig. 3. Samples etched with chromic acid show the same topography, and therefore, only ammonium persulfate etched samples were studied in detail. In accordance with the XPS results, the SEM images show precipitate and impurity free surfaces. The morphology, after aluminum and copper removal, is a replica of both the aluminum machined structure, at a micrometer scale, and the microroughness derived from the grains of the sputtered copper at a lower scale. Figures 2 and 3 highlight a clear difference in the NEG topography between the two coating sequences.
3. Bulk composition and grain size
Bulk composition was assessed using EDX. For the Cu/NEG/mandrel coating, the measured TiZrV composition is on average Ti_{29}Zr_{38}V_{32} and is slightly enriched with zirconium, which agrees with the surface composition measured by XPS. For the Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel sequence, the NEG composition is on average Ti_{40}Zr_{23}V_{36} and is enriched with titanium, which differs from the surface composition which is closer to the nominal target composition. The standard NEG coated sample (reference) has a bulk composition of Ti_{39}Zr_{23}V_{37} which is similar to that of NEG coatings in the Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel sequence. All compositions reported earlier are in the zone of acceptable activation in the triangle of composition according to Refs [17] and  [18].
The NEG coatings were also analyzed by means of x-ray diffraction; the data are presented in Fig. 4. The broad diffraction peak at about 38° is attributed to TiZrV coating [17,18]; the grain size according to the Scherrer equation [19] is about 3 nm in the three studied cases. This was expected from previous studies in the same composition range [17].
B. Thermal activation characterization
1. XPS analysis during the NEG activation process
The NEG coatings were first measured as received and, then, after in situ heating for 1 h at 160, 200, and 250 °C [see Fig. 5(a)]. The measurements were performed with the sample still at the temperature of heating to avoid undesirable adsorption of the residual gas.
The activation process consists in the dissolution of the native oxide layer into the bulk of the TiZrV film. During the activation, the Ti, Zr, and V peaks shift in binding energy as the metals change from oxidized to metallic state [see Fig. 5(b)] and carbon converts to carbide [15]. One possible quantification of the activation would be the evaluation of oxidized-metal peak intensity ratio dependence on temperature, but from the experience of more than 200 samples during the coating campaign of 7 km of the Large Hadron Collider chambers, the decrease of the oxygen peak was found to be a more sensitive method [as seen in Fig. 5(b), the samples show a similar Zr metal shift at 250 °C]. Therefore, the preferred evaluation of the activation is performed by measuring the decrease of the O1s signal after each heating step. In Fig. 6, the relative O1s signal reduction as a function of heating temperature is shown for the flat F samples and tubular T samples. Both types of samples exhibit the same behavior as expected. From the slope of the O1s decrease in the temperature interval of 160 to 200 °C, one can identify the coating sequence that exhibits a faster activation. In summary, all NEG coatings produced with the Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel layer sequence show a faster activation compared to those with the Cu/NEG/mandrel sequence.
For Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel coatings, the two copper etching solutions are compared. The O1s peak reduction trend is similar for both etching treatments. The O1s peak at 250 °C is reduced by 70%–80% of its original value. As a result, ammonium persulfate is selected as copper etching solution to avoid the safety hazard of chromic acid.
C. Pumping speed measurements
H_{2} and CO pumping speeds of the produced vacuum chambers were measured after 24-h heating at increasing temperature steps from 180 to 280 °C.
H_{2} pumping speed exhibits low values for the NEG coating prepared by both coating sequences, namely, ten times lower than expected for standard NEG as seen in Fig. 7.
In Fig. 8, CO sticking probability is represented for different heating temperatures and for the two coating sequences. The maximum sticking probability of this gas for a reference stainless-steel or copper OFE NEG-coated chamber is 0.8–0.9, while it attains 0.6 for the Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel sequence chamber and 0.2 for the Cu/NEG/mandrel one.
After heating at 230 °C for 24 h, the CO pumping speed was measured as a function of the quantity of CO adsorbed on the NEG surface. When the pumping speed becomes negligible, the maximum gas capacity on the NEG surface is attained (see Fig. 9). The maximum quantities of CO that can be pumped are 3 × 10^{12} molecules cm^{−2} and around 10^{14} molecules cm^{−2} for the Cu/NEG/mandrel and Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel sequences, respectively. Typical values for standard smooth NEG coating are about 5 × 10^{14}–10^{15} molecules cm^{−2} for both copper and stainless steel substrates [5].
IV. DISCUSSION
The experimental results show that it is possible to transfer a NEG coating from an aluminum mandrel to a copper electroformed vacuum chamber. A Cu interlayer between the mandrel and the NEG coating avoids the cross-contamination between the Al and the NEG. The analyzed NEG surface is the one produced at the beginning of the NEG coating process. This could explain the scattering in the measured surface compositions. The oxygen depletion during heating as monitored by XPS shows results that are similar to those obtained with standard sputtered TiZrV films.
H_{2} pumping speeds are 1 order of magnitude lower that the standard values. Although the CO pumping speeds can reach values only a factor of two lower than the standard, the surface capacity of this gas is too low to envisage any application in accelerators.
Based on the measured data, it is not easy to formulate hypothesis about such results. Surface contaminations can affect both the CO capacity and the H_{2} sticking probability. However, at least for the coating sequence with the Cu interlayer, if any contamination is present onto the surface, it is out of the reach of the XPS method or sensitivity. On the other hand, the limited pumping speed for H_{2} could be explained by assuming a contaminated TiZrV bulk. It is well known that hydrogen, after dissociation, diffuses into the bulk of NEG materials. A high content of contaminants could reduce H diffusivity and slow the absorption of the respective molecules.
The contaminants could be introduced either by the chemical etching to reveal the NEG surface or by transfer from the electroformed copper. The former source of contamination seems unlikely: a standard NEG coating was immersed sequentially in NaOH or ammonium persulfate bath without recording loss of functional performance. At the present state of knowledge, the electroformed copper seems to be the cause of the lower pumping speed. The next step of this work will focus on this hypothesis and will introduce other variables, i.e., the characteristic values of the electroforming process (current density, bath composition, and DC or AC plating mode).
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The first Cu electroformed NEG precoated vacuum chambers were successfully assembled and tested. The overall assembly procedure has been validated. The aluminum mandrel suits well as it is easy to procure and to machine; it is compatible with PVD coating systems; it guarantees mechanical stiffness during the process and its removal does not affect the thin film physical integrity. The electroforming as well does not affect the physical integrity of the NEG film; the adherence between the two coatings is acceptable. The assembly of the stainless steel flanges to the electroformed tube, through copper insert brazing and electron-beam welding, is ultrahigh vacuum compatible.
The copper interlayer in the sequence Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel allows achieving a clean NEG surface, acceptable results in terms of NEG activation in accordance with the XPS test procedure, and higher CO pumping speeds. The copper interlayer is rapidly removed by ammonium persulfate and it does not leave residues on the NEG surface. However, the full functionality of the NEG coating was not achieved, in particular, for hydrogen pumping.
Future activities will focus on the identification of possible contaminants. In addition, the electroplating parameters will be tuned to reduce the transfer of impurities to the NEG film.
In parallel, the assembly of flanges during the electroplating process will be studied to avoid electron beam welding and brazing, so that the global cost of the vacuum chamber can be reduced.
Table I. 
XPS surface analysis of TiZrV thin film on copper electroplated substrate, after aluminum etching. On the left, the concentration of oxygen, carbon, and surface impurities (Na and Fe) is presented. On the right, the relative concentrations of Ti, Zr, and V are shown assuming that only the metals are present. A reference NEG standard coating on laminated copper sheet is also shown for comparison. The latter was deposited using the same coating parameters, i.e., 380 W power, 8 × 10^{−4} mbar Kr pressure in the same system.
Table II. 
XPS surface analysis of TiZrV thin film on copper electroplated substrate, after aluminum removal and interlayer copper etching with #.CA chromic acid or #.APS ammonium persulfate. The reference NEG coating is also shown for comparison.
Table I. -body
Sample ID	XPS surface concentration (at. %)a	Relative metallic composition (at. %)
O	C	Na	Fe	Ti	Zr	V
NEG/Cub	52.9	23.4	—	—	24.2	41.7	34.1
F1	42.1	39.5	1.4	6.1	28.2	36.3	35.5
F2	48.9	11.8	0.6	12	29.6	46.1	24.4
T1	49.4	21.6	—	3.7	22.9	50.4	26.7
T2	51.9	28.7	—	5.2	24.6	57.2	18.1
^{a} TiZrV completes the total surface concentration.
^{b} Reference sample.
Table II. -body
Sample ID	XPS Surface concentration (at. %)a	Relative metallic composition (at. %)
O	C	Cr	Fe	Ti	Zr	V
NEG/Cub	52.9	23.4	—	—	24.2	41.7	34.1
F3.CA	55.5	20	10.8	—	32.2	37.7	30.1
F3.APS	52.8	26.2	—	—	32.8	36.6	30.6
F4.CA	46.7	33.9	5.1	—	33.1	35.9	31
F4.APS	51.8	15.9	—	—	29.9	31.9	38.2
T3.CA	53	16.4	8.1	—	31.2	33.9	34.9
T3.APS	55.5	11.7	—	—	34.2	31.2	34.6
T4.CA	51.3	15.8	10.3	—	31.4	32.3	36.3
T4.APS	54.1	12.1	—	—	33.2	32	34.8
^{a} TiZrV completes the total surface concentration.
^{b} Reference sample.
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) Main steps of the production process: preparation of the mandrel, the mandrel thin film coating by DC magnetron sputtering, the electroforming of the chamber, and the removal of the mandrel without damaging the thin film. The example shows the Cu/NEG/mandrel coating sequence.
Fig. 2. 
SEM pictures of TiZrV thin film on copper electroplated substrate after aluminum etching with NaOH 5 M. Pictures show lower (a) and higher (b) magnification.
Fig. 3. 
SEM pictures of TiZrV thin films on copper electroplated substrate after interlayer copper etching with ammonium persulfate. Pictures show lower (a) and higher (b) magnification.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) X-ray diffractograms for TiZrV films on copper, for the two coating sequences (samples F1 and F3.APS) and the reference. The measurements are performed using Cu Kα radiation at 5° incident angle.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) (a) Survey XPS spectra of a Ti_{32}Zr_{37}V_{30} (at. %) film on copper substrate, as received (RT), and after heating for 1 h at various temperatures. The measurement was performed at the end of the heating plateau. (b) Evolution of Zr3d XPS spectra from room temperature to 250 °C heating step for the reference NEG/Cu sample, Cu/NEG/mandrel and Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel etched with ammonium persulfate.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) O-1s peak evolution on TiZrV NEG thin film coating as a function of heating temperature for the reference NEG/Cu, Cu/NEG/mandrel coatings, Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel coatings etched with chromic acid and Cu/NEG/Cu/mandrel coatings etched with ammonium persulfate. Flat samples (a) and tube samples (b) are compared.
Fig. 7. 
(Color online) H_{2} sticking probability as a function of heating temperature for TiZrV films on electrodeposited copper after 24 h of heating. The two Inverse NEG sequences are compared to a standard NEG deposited on stainless steel and oxygen-free copper as a reference.
Fig. 8. 
(Color online) CO sticking probability as a function of heating temperature for TiZrV films on electrodeposited copper after 24 h of heating. The two Inverse NEG sequences are compared to a standard NEG deposited on stainless steel and oxygen-free copper as a reference.
Fig. 9. 
(Color online) CO pumping speed as a function of the quantity of CO adsorbed in TiZrV films on copper electroplated substrate. The samples are activated for 24 h at 230 °C. The two Inverse NEG sequences are compared to a standard NEG deposited on stainless steel and oxygen-free copper as a reference.
