Degradation analysis of an operating PV module on a Farm Sanctuary
Silicon photovoltaic (PV) modules are considered the most reliable component of a photovoltaic system and according to the manufacturers have a lifetime from 25 to 30 years. However, some modules degrade or fail along their service time under outdoor exposure and harsh conditions. The reliability and lifetime of a module depend on its energy conversion performance and degradation modes. For better understanding of the mechanisms behind the degradation and failure of PV modules, this study reviews the governing degradation modes and investigates a ten-year-old operating crystalline silicon PV module installed at an active farm and animal sanctuary. Field current-voltage testing and Infrared imaging for hot spot detection have been employed in examining this PV module showing localized damaged regions. While new remote sensing tools are being deployed to monitor large-scale PV systems, this study provides a basic overview of PV reliability to small-scale community users. This work exemplifies academic-community collaborations in the field of sustainability.
I. INTRODUCTION
Home to the Center for Sustainable Living, Odonata Sanctuary is a 100 acre active farm, animal sanctuary, and education center in the Finger Lakes Region of Upstate New York [1]. The Center for Sustainable Living (CSL) recognizes the wisdom in natural systems that serve as models for ecological well-being. The Center provides a library of sustainability literature as well as a place for instructional programs and educational resources, which integrate this knowledge into human ways of living. The residence at the Center includes what once was the largest solar installation of its kind in New York State. The barn, where several rescued animals reside, incorporates solar panels as well as a wind turbine and is completely off the grid. The CSL provides a space for researchers to develop working models of energy creating and storage systems. It has been providing a real laboratory for students interested in alternative energy and sustainability. The photovoltaic (PV) system installed in this sanctuary that started to show degradation, apparently caused by a golf ball hit, became the subject of this study between the academic institution RIT and the CSL on degradation in PV modules. The damaged module was identified, decommissioned, and investigated (Fig. 1).
The identification of degradation failure modes on PV modules is important to evaluate their performance along time and so their lifetime. The capacity of operation within the limits of acceptability criteria defines the PV module lifetime. Large influx of PV systems worldwide mandates an increasing demand for testing laboratories with capabilities to analyze early degradation and concealed defects in PV modules. Munoz et_al published an excellent review on early degradation of silicon PV in 2011 (Ref [2]), and our study essentially builds upon it with a specific case. In an analytical review published by Jordan and Kurtz [3], about 2000 degradation rates, measured on individual modules or entire systems, were assembled from the literature, showing a median value of 0.5%/year. Yet even today, according to a recent report [4], the risks associated with module performance over long periods of time remain fairly unclear. The authors in this report state that publicly available and high quality field data on long-term operating performance of PV systems are limited. Since field data take many years to generate high quality, independent laboratory data have played a critical role in evaluating PV module quality and long-term reliability.
The main factors which cause the degradation are temperature, humidity, irradiation, and mechanical shock. The degradation causes can be broadly divided into three levels—packaging, interconnect, and device levels. Figure 2 depicts various degradation modes belonging to each of these three levels [5]. From the lifetime point of view, typically, the failures of products are classified into three categories: infant-failures, midlife-failures, and wear-out-failures as depicted in Fig. 3 [6].
Module power degradation over time is built into project expectations and is warranted by the manufacturers. The current standard 25-year warranty is typically designed if modules degrade more than 3% within the first year and at a linear rate down to 80% of their initial nameplate power in year 25 [4]. Some manufactures define it as when, under standard test conditions (STCs), the PV panel reaches 80% of the specified power output [7].
Failures occurring in the midlife of PV modules are described in a study of DeGraaff [8]. This study shows a quite high rate of defect interconnections in the module and failures due to module glass breakage. The relative failure rates of the junction box and cables (∼12%), burn marks on cells (∼10%), and encapsulant failure (∼9%) are comparatively high. Junction boxes are installed directly onto the back of every PV panel and serve as the interface between the conductor ribbons on the panel and the DC input and output cables. They contain bypass diodes to protect the PV panel from reverse current during hours of darkness and from degraded arrays.
Besides these module failures, many PV modules show light-induced power degradation (LID) right after installation. The LID degradation mechanisms in crystalline Si (c-Si) are bulk and surface related [9–15]. The bulk effect is primarily attributed to the formation of boron-oxygen complexes and follows a behavior similar to that of the changes in the minority carrier lifetime [12]. The surface effect appears to be associated with the interface SiN_{x}:H/Si between the hydrogenated silicon nitride (SiN_{x}:N) antireflection coating (ARC) and Si [16]. The LID is a degradation mechanism which occurs anyhow, and the rated power printed on the PV module is usually adjusted by the expected standardized saturated power loss due to this degradation. LID is significantly more pronounced at elevated temperatures, known as “Light and elevated Temperature Induced Degradation (LeTID).” [17] If not suppressed, LeTID can lead to a loss in relative conversion efficiency of more than 10% [18].
Potential Induced Degradation (PID) occurs when the module's voltage potential and leakage current cause ion mobility within the module between the semiconductor material and other elements of the module (e.g., glass, mount, and frame). In a recent publication, Luo et_al [19] have provided a comprehensive review of PID covering its causes, modelling of leakage current paths, and preventive measures against PID. The effect of PID can be divided into three categories: system level, module level, and cell level. At the system level, the potential difference between the PV system and the ground is critical [20]. At the module level, environmental parameters such as temperature and humidity are important. The intrusion of water in the module increases the encapsulant conductivity and so the leakage current. At the cell level, the processing as well as the quality of the base material is critical. This effect is more pronounced in large PV system installations equipped with p-type Si crystalline solar cells. Due to the potential difference between the PV module and its structure, electrons can escape through the grounded wire when there is a lack of proper insulation. It generates leakage current, and this electrical current induced in the module causes a progressive performance deterioration [21]. In its most noticeable form, PID decreases drastically the parallel resistance of silicon wafer-based solar cells referred to as PID of the shunting type (PID-s). It degrades the space charge recombination current density and ideality factor (J_{02} and n_{2}) of silicon wafer-based solar cells.
Recent studies correlated the PID with the accumulation of sodium (Na) at the interface between the SiN ARC and the Si substrate and in the depletion region [22]. Naumann et_al [23] used time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) to measure the positively charged ions. The authors found Na intensity near the SiN/Si interface at the PID shunt. Inserting a SiO_{y}N_{x} layer at the interface of SiN_{x}/Si has been shown to improve PID immunity [24].
Hacke et_al have presented key experimental results towards the goal of developing standardize qualification tests for system voltage durability of modules [25]. They have demonstrated that the 60 °C, 85% relative humidity (RH) system voltage stress is recommended to qualify modules for PID durability.
II. DEGRADATION EFFECTS ON I-V CHARACTERISTICS
The I-V measurement gives parameters such as short circuit current (I_{sc}), open circuit voltage (V_{oc}), maximum power (P_{max}), and fill-factor (FF), which indicate the performance. The effects of parasitic series and shunt resistances are also contained in the observed I-V characteristics [26]. Using the conventional two-diode model, I-V of a PV module comprising identical cells of area A_{c} with N_{s} in series and N_{p} cells in parallel can be expressed as
where I_{M} and V_{M} are module current and voltage and I_{scM} is the module short circuit current; J_{01} and J_{02} are diode reverse saturation current densities of cells due to the neutral region and depletion region recombinations, respectively, and n_{1} and n_{2} are the respective ideality factors. R_{sM} and R_{shM} are the parasitic module series and shunt resistances. Assuming a single exponential model i.e., J_{01}≫J_{02} and large shunt parasitic resistance, Eq. (1) can be written as
Analysis of the module I-V curve is used for system troubleshooting when the system is performing lower than expected. There are five basic PV array performance impairments: series losses, shunt losses, mismatch losses, reduced current, and reduced voltage as illustrated in Fig. 4. The decrease in the fill factor (FF) and hence in the efficiency caused by the series resistance is approximately proportional to the series resistance, and the decrease in the FF caused by the shunt resistance is inversely proportional to the shunt resistance and I_{sc.} [27] The series losses show up in the I-V curve as a decreased slope or inward tilt of the curve near V_{oc}. This effect is equivalent to adding a single external resistance in series with the PV module. Series resistance losses can be internal, in a PV module, or external, in the array wiring and switchgear [28]. The internal loss is often related to broken internal interconnections. The corrosion or poor connection of array wiring is the external cause of increased series resistance. Shunt losses due to shunt resistance result in an increased slope, or downward tilt, of the I-V curve near the short circuit current. The shunt resistance effect is equivalent to connecting resistors across PV cells. It is caused by resistive paths between the cell's front and back surfaces. Cracked or damaged cells, imperfection in cell material, and poor edge isolation can cause current leakage, leading to shunt losses.
When part of a PV module is shaded, the unshaded cells will force the shaded cells to pass more current than their new short circuit current. The only way the shaded cells can operate at a current higher than their short circuit current is to operate in a region of negative voltage that is to cause a net voltage loss to the system. The shaded cells will dissipate power as heat and cause “hot spots.” The shaded cells drag down the overall I-V curve of the group of cells. The effect of this shading is also dependent on how the module is shaded and results in “kink” in the curve. The same effect is observed when some cells become inferior due to other effects. One way to minimize the effect shading (or degradation) has on a single module in a series string is to use bypass diodes in the junction box. Bypass diodes allow current to pass around shaded cells and thereby reduce the voltage losses through the module. Mismatch losses are identified in the PV module I-V characteristics as notches or kinks. This effect has many possible causes including shading, cracked or defective cells, uneven soiling, shorted bypass diodes, and mismatched cells or modules. The reduced current is characterized by the reduction in the height of the I-V curve. Its causes are uniform soiling, edge soiling, PV module degradation, or the weather condition with reduced input irradiance. Finally, the reduced voltage occurs when the width of the I-V curve is affected. It is caused by the high module temperature, module degradation, and shorted bypass diodes. It is relatively insensitive to normal soiling.
III. METHODS FOR FAILURE DETECTION
To identify the degradation mechanisms acting in field aged modules, some of the frequently used techniques [29,30] are illustrated in Fig. 5 and are briefly reviewed. The first step in the failure mode analysis is to evaluate the conditions of the physical location where the PV system is operating. The most used techniques to analyze the modules are described in this section.
A. Field I-V measurements
Standardized PV module accelerated aging tests and qualification tests are performed to ensure the module stability, lifetime, and performance. The standard test conditions (STC) are
• Irradiance: 1000 W/m^{2}
• Cell temperature: 25 °C
• Spectral distribution of irradiance: AM1.5G
• Normal incidence over the cell.
B. Visual inspection
When inspecting the damaged panel [Fig. 10(a)], one can notice the presence of different defects. The glass presents cracks all over the module, some white areas characterize delamination defects, and some areas located in a specific cell [Fig. 10(b)] show brown coloration, which indicates encapsulant discoloration. The module back sheet [Fig. 10(c)] shows the burn marks located at the same position as the damaged cell shown in Fig. 10(b), which indicates the occurrence of hot spots.
This solar panel glass is designed to prevent from breaking apart when it shatters, like a windshield on a car. While golf ball strikes are not part of required testing, solar panels are tested to withstand 1 in. hail striking the panel at over 50 mph. This closely approximates a golf ball. The solar modules on solar canopies for golf carts or solar farms near golf courts are being designed with a protected tempered glass panel that will shatter if hit at right angles by a golf ball traveling at full speed. In cases where the angle of impact is somewhat less than 90°, the golf ball will bounce off, causing little or no damage [43].
C. Infrared (IR) imaging
This technique consists of scanning the module with an electromagnetic radiation detector sensitive to infrared radiation (3–15 μm wavelength range). It identifies the presence of localized heat generation caused by the joule effect. The cells with poor contacts, which are shunted or short circuited, generate less current than the others connected in series and so become reverse biased, behaving like resistors, dissipating heat [31]. The heat from these hot spots appears in the thermal imaging as bright spots. Aerial inspections (from drone or airplane) of PV power plants are becoming more common as a means of screening for defective or underperforming modules and strings (Fig. 6) [32].
Infrared (IR) camera based lock-in thermography (LIT) is a characterization technique for solar cells and other electronic devices, which has extensively been used by researchers. Dark lock-in thermography (DLIT) images the dissipated power density, which is the product of the local voltage and the local current density [33]. At low forward bias, DLIT preferentially images defects and ohmic shunts, which leads to the depletion region recombination current (described by the parameter J_{02} of the two diode model). At high forward bias, defects located at the base that affect the diffusion current (described by J_{01}) are imaged. Local defects govern the dark I-V characteristics, and thus, most characteristics can only be understood based on local analysis. If DLIT is performed under reverse bias, breakdown sites are detected, their current is measured quantitatively, and parameters such as the slope of the I-V curve or the temperature coefficient can be measured. When lock-in thermography (LIT) is performed under illumination (ILIT), light is used instead of voltage applied by contacts, to drive current through the shunts. The general limitation of the LIT technique is the degraded spatial resolution caused by thermal blurring.
D. Luminescence imaging
There are two variations of this technique, photoluminescence (PL) and electroluminescence (EL). Their principle is based on the radiative recombination of excited charge carriers when illumination (for PL) and forward bias (for EL) are applied. The luminescence intensity depends exponentially on the energy separation of the electron and hole Fermi levels in the bulk material. Hence, the output of luminescence imaging is a measure of the local minority carrier lifetime or the diffusion length distribution.
Electroluminescence (EL) imaging has been used as a non-invasive technique capable of analyzing defects in PV cells and modules quickly. Fuyuki et_al first introduced this technique for photovoltaic applications by capturing with a CCD camera the light emission from PV cells under forward bias [34]. The authors found that the intensity of the emission was distributed following the mapping of the minority carrier diffusion length in poly-Si active layers and were able to detect the defective areas in the cell. Kasemann et_al [35] investigated luminescence to detect shunts in silicon solar cells as shunt drain majority currents, causing voltage drops across the surrounding series resistances affecting luminescence images [36].
E. Light and electron beam induced current (EBIC)
The Light Beam induced current (LBIC) method consists of scanning the surface with a beam of HeNe laser with a wavelength of 633 nm. The signal from the laser is chopped, and the output current from the module is detected using a lock-in amplifier [37,38]. The Electron Beam induced current (EBIC) is another non-intrusive method for characterizing photovoltaic cells. This technique consists of scanning an electron beam on the semiconductor device. It is generally performed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) in the specimen current generation mode. The images generated by the EBIC are usually compared with the secondary electron (SE) images. The EBIC can be applied to several different sample geometries. The surface Schottky diode, where the electron beam is incident normal to the cell surface, is the standard geometry. When the electron beam of the SEM reaches the device, it generates electron-hole pairs. Then, the current flows the same way as when incoming light reaches the PV cell.
IV. HOT SPOTS IN PV MODULES
Hot spot heating is characterized by the higher temperature of a single cell or a portion of a cell in relation to surrounding cells. This occurs when a solar cell within a module generates less current than the string current of the module. The phenomenon is caused by shading, damaged cells, or the electrical mismatch between cells. The affected cell becomes reverse biased and dissipates power in the form of heat [39].
Simon and Meyer correlated the formation of hot spots with the elemental composition of multicrystalline Si cells [39]. Infrared Thermography (IRT) was used to map the surface temperature distribution while in the reverse bias mode. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) revealed that the hot spot heating is responsible for irreversible destruction of the solar cell structure. The authors also performed the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) analysis and detected the presence of several transition elements in hot spot regions. The presence of oxygen, carbon, iron, and platinum in some areas is attributed to the formation of hot spots in the solar cell. Solheim et_al used an IR camera to measure the hot spots in solar cells and simulated it using a 3D finite element model [40]. The temperature trends were shown as a function of location relative to the edge of the cell and shunt size. The simulation showed that the hot spot near the edges reaches much higher temperatures than the ones in the middle due to the higher heat conductivity in the silicon solar cell when compared to the laminate. Breitenstein et_al performed experiments with a multicrystalline Si PV cell to investigate the origin of non-ideal diode behavior [36]. The authors correlated the DLIT images with the I-V characteristics of a typical PV cell. Under +0.5 V forward bias, both the diffusion and recombination currents flow in large amounts. At −0.5 V reverse bias, the recombination current is negligibly small, and therefore, only current along some ohmic shunt paths are visible. This fact explains the hot spots visible in forward bias that are not shown in reverse bias. The forward bias shows the recombination currents at the edges of the cell and some spots in the interior area.
In the traditional interpretation of I–V characteristics of solar cells, all nonlinear currents belonged to the cell, and only ohmic current paths across the pn junction have been attributed to “shunts.” With the availability of precision lock-in thermography techniques, these shunts can be made visible. Breitenstein et_al [41] identified nine different types of shunts, with six being the process induced and three caused by grown-in defects. Some of these can be non-linear Schottky type.
The shuntometers employing thermography are simple low cost set-ups to determine the location of short-circuits (shunts). It allows a quick identification of material or processing problems and helps to prevent hot-spots which can occur at the module level. The manual system can detect all major shunts in large area reverse biased solar cells. We performed a demonstration of a Pasan shuntometer on multicrystalline Si cells and compared it with the IR imaging by intentionally creating a damaged region. The defects generated shunts, causing hot spots where power is dissipated. The voltage supplied was 4 V with the current of 0.2 A in reverse bias. Figure 7(a) shows a scratch made on the cell, Fig. 7(b) shows the hotspots revealed at scratch ends in the heat sensitive polymer film of the Pasan instrument, and Fig. 7(c) shows the IR image of the damaged regions of the cell.
V. MODULE PERFORMANCE INVESTIGATIONS
The experimental performance evaluation was done on the module, Sunmodule SW 165 mono manufactured by SolarWorld. Its specifications are listed in Table I. It consists of 72 series connected 5 × 5 square inch monocrystalline cells that lie behind a 3 mm hardened-glass glazing and are embedded in transparent EVA (ethylene-vinyl-acetate). The back of the module is sealed with a very high quality Tedlar film. The module stability is the result of the deep inset of the glass in the frame and its continuous bond between the two. The connecting socket has no hollow cavities and is water-tight and resistant to UV radiation and microbes, as well as very temperature resistant [42]. It has three 24 cell series connected segments each paralleled with a bypass diode. This module was installed on a roof at Odonata Sanctuary in Honeoye Falls, New York, in 2005 and has been in service since then. The module was hit by a golf ball, and the glass breakage is visible along the whole panel. However, on the exact day, the panel was damaged, which is unknown.
The methods used to evaluate the module performance are field I-V measurements, visual inspection, and infra-red imaging.
A. Field I-V measurement
An AMPROBE^{®} Solar Analyzer was used to measure the module I-V characteristics. The irradiance was measured to be 1064 W m^{−2}, and the temperature was 18 °C during the field measurements. Figure 8 shows the resulted I-V characteristics. The maximum power point reached was 88 W, lower than that specified under STC (165 W). Taking into account the change in irradiance (Δη/η(%)=4lnn, where n is the concentration factor) and temperature (Δη/η(%)=−0.03/K) for Si PV, the module should have provided a peak power of 168 W at the conditions of measurements.
In the module I-V curve, a steep drop in voltage was observed around 33% of its initial value, an indicative that one segment of the PV module has mismatched cells, and so, the current is flowing through the bypass diode instead of the segments (Fig. 9). The increase in the I-V slope near the short circuit current shows degradation in shunt, indicating leakage in the module.
C. Infrared imaging
Figure 10(d) shows the infrared imaging of the defective cell. Using an external power source, we applied 21 V and 1.0 A to the panel, and the hot spot reached temperature close to 50 °C, which confirms the suspicion of mismatch losses in one of the segments. Applying the reverse bias by segment is possible to identify each segment once they get hotter than the ones that are not at applied voltage. Analyzing the images by segment, one can notice some spots with slightly higher temperature near the frames, as shown in Fig. 11. Figure 11(a) shows an IR image of segment 1 (as labeled in Fig. 9) of the panel showing almost uniform temperature, and Fig. 11(b) shows the IR image of segment 2 indicative of a healthy string. Segment 3 shows a seriously defective cell. Because it gets much hotter, other moderately defective cells are not very visible. One can see it even in Fig. 11(a) taken on reverse biasing segment 1, which was imaged after segment 3, and the defective cell is still hot.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Visual inspection revealed that the module had broken glass, delamination defects, metal contact corrosion, encapsulant browning, and hot spot evidences. The outdoor I-V characteristic measurement showed mismatch losses indicative of some cells degraded with one most defective cell in segment 3, leading to an operating maximum voltage of about two thirds of the specified value. The IR imaging exhibited an intense hot spot area on the damaged cell that reached a temperature of 50 °C, which confirmed that under service; the current is flowing through the bypass diode instead through segment 3. Less intense hot spots were observed in regions of some cells near the frame. The hypothesis is that these hot spots are attributed to Potential Induced Degradation (PID), which is caused by the accumulation of sodium in defects, decreasing the parallel resistance and/or increasing current J_{02} and ideality factor n_{2} due to recombination of charge carriers in the depletion region. This study summarizes the causes and methods of inspection of PV module degradation. Future models could incorporate dynamic changes in cell/module parameters and techniques to inspect and monitor degradation in real time for remote and rural locations.
TABLE I. 
Electrical specification of Sunmodule SW 165 mono.
TABLE I. -body
Module power P_{max}, W	165
Rated voltage V_{mpp}, V	35.0
Rated current I_{mpp}, A	4.72
Open circuit voltage V_{oc}, V	44.5
Short circuit current I_{sc}, A	5.4
Maximum system voltage, V	600
Cells per module	72
FIG. 1. 
Roof top standalone 6 kW PV system installed at Odonata Sanctuary. The degraded panel was identified and decommissioned for analysis presented in this study.
FIG. 2. 
Various possible photovoltaic module degradation modes belonging to packaging, interconnect, and device levels.
FIG. 3. 
Three types of typical time dependent failure modes of crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules (Reprinted with permission from Review of failures of photovoltaic modules, Report IEA-PVPS T13-01:2014. International Energy Agency, Paris Cedex 15 France.) [6].
FIG. 4. 
A schematic depicting the effects of degradation causing high series resistance, low shunt resistance, and mismatch in module I-V characteristics (Reproduced with permission from Hernday, Field Applications for I-V Curve Tracers: SolarPro Magazine, Issue 4.5, Aug/Sep 2011. Copyright 2018 Home Power Inc.) [28].
FIG. 5. 
Flowchart showing various methods to investigate PV degradation.
FIG. 6. 
Aerial thermal scan of a PV plant (Source: Heliolytics Inc. Reprinted with permission from Andrews and Sinclair, NREL/SNL/BNL PV Reliability Workshops, Lakewood, CO, 28 February–2 March 2017. Copyright Heliolytics Inc) [32].
FIG. 7. 
(a) Intentional scratch made on the mc-Si cell; (b) hotspots obtained using the Pasan Shuntometer device at the scratch edges; (c) IR image of the scratched mc-Si cell.
FIG. 8. 
(a) Observed and specified current-voltage voltage characteristics of the PV module; (b) power-voltage characteristics.
FIG. 9. 
Schematic showing the module configuration into three segments and current path at the maximum operating power.
FIG. 10. 
(a) Photograph of the PV module analyzed; (b) PV module area showing glass breakage and delamination defects; (c) damaged PV module backsheet; (d) infra-red image of the defective cell.
FIG. 11. 
Infra-red imaging of reverse biased (a) segment 1; (b) segment 2; (c) segment 3 of the PV module.
