Helicon plasma ion temperature measurements and observed ion cyclotron heating in proto-MPEX
The Prototype-Material Plasma Exposure eXperiment (Proto-MPEX) linear plasma device is a test bed for exploring and developing plasma source concepts to be employed in the future steady-state linear device Material Plasma Exposure eXperiment (MPEX) that will study plasma-material interactions for the nuclear fusion program. The concept foresees using a helicon plasma source supplemented with electron and ion heating systems to reach necessary plasma conditions. In this paper, we discuss ion temperature measurements obtained from Doppler broadening of spectral lines from argon ion test particles. Plasmas produced with helicon heating alone have average ion temperatures downstream of the Helicon antenna in the range of 3 ± 1 eV; ion temperature increases to 10 ± 3 eV are observed with the addition of ion cyclotron heating (ICH). The temperatures are higher at the edge than the center of the plasma either with or without ICH. This type of profile is observed with electrons as well. A one-dimensional RF antenna model is used to show where heating of the plasma is expected.
I. INTRODUCTION
In fusion reactors, the power and particles are primarily exhausted to the divertor, where the open magnetic field line intersects the plasma facing components. The heat fluxes to these components are expected to be 10 MW/m^{2} in the steady-state with slow transients of up to 20 MW/m^{2} [1]. In addition, fast transients from the so-called Edge-Localized-Modes (ELMS) can lead to heat fluxes of 1 GW/m^{2} for 1 ms duration. Electron and ion temperatures in the divertor are in the range of 1–15 eV in front of the target. Linear plasma devices are a cost-effective alternative to tokamaks to study the plasma material interactions in fusion reactors. Several new linear plasma devices are either under construction or have recently started operation to explore various aspects of plasma-material interactions [2–4]. All these devices have limitations in achievable ion temperatures and cannot reach the conditions of a fusion reactor divertor. The newly planned Material Plasma Exposure eXperiment linear plasma device (MPEX) is intended to create fusion reactor divertor conditions, including the ion temperature. To achieve those plasma parameters in front of the target, the plasma source and heating systems need to achieve plasma densities of up to 6 × 10^{19} m^{−3} and electron and ion temperatures in the range of 25 to 30 eV [5,6].
In this paper, we report evidence of successful ion cyclotron heating in Proto-MPEX. We believe that this is the first-time such heating has been demonstrated on a linear PMI device. The primary plasma heating method in Proto-MPEX is by whistler waves generated by a helicon antenna. Additional heating in the form of ion cyclotron heating (ICH) is used in Proto-MPEX to allow the device to achieve a wider range of plasma conditions than could otherwise be realized, including higher total heat fluxes and higher ion energies. Unlike high ion energies produced by substrate biasing (see, for example, Ref [7]), the ion energy is not all in a direction perpendicular to the target, and this allows effects where targets are tilted relative to the magnetic field to be explored, such as the effects of variation in the size of the magnetic pre-sheath [8].
Slow wave beach heating is the method of ion cyclotron heating that has been chosen for use on Proto-MPEX. Slow wave heating has long been recognized as an efficient means to couple power into a single species plasma, as demonstrated in the 1960s in the B66 device [9], and later in tandem mirrors including Phaedrus [10], Tara [11], and others. Efficient single-pass damping of slow waves has been previously observed on Phaedrus in the context of ion trapping [12], and more recently on the VASIMR VX-50, which is like MPEX in that the ICH is used to heat a high-density target plasma produced by a helicon plasma generator. In the VASIMIR experiment, ICH power coupling efficiency ≥80%, and ion energies up to 200 eV were achieved for deuterium plasmas [13]. There are significant differences though between Proto-MPEX and VASIMR VX-50. Proto-MPEX has a target located downstream from the ion cyclotron heating region, where significant neutral recycling occurs. In addition, the plasma density in Proto-MPEX is an order of magnitude or higher than the value observed on the VASIMR device while ICH is applied. The higher density is required to reach PMI relevant conditions. In this paper, the progress of Proto-MPEX's ion heating toward PMI conditions will be discussed.
II. BASIC MACHINE OPERATIONS AND DIAGNOSTICS
Proto-MPEX makes use of a helicon for plasma generation as described by Rapp et_al [14] Deuterium is the primary working gas, but during the experiments discussed here, the plasma was seeded with ∼10% argon in order to measure ion temperatures from Doppler broadening of spectral lines [15]. Several sets of discharges with and without ICH operation were taken at 95 kW input helicon power and 16 kW input ICH power. These input power conditions gave the most reliable and repeatable discharges.
The basic structure of the device is shown in Fig. 1. A half-turn helical copper antenna provides ICH with a left-handed helicity, which is the opposite helicity to that of the helicon antenna. This first-generation antenna has an inner diameter of 9 cm, a length of 25 cm, and a center point 95.89 cm from the target. The antenna and the accompanying feedthrough are designed for moderate power operation up to 30 kW and are uncooled. Photographs of the antenna and feedthrough both outside and inside the vacuum vessel are provided in Fig. 2.
The antenna launches slow waves with a left-hand circular polarization matching the direction of ion gyro-rotation at the local maximum in the magnetic field (∼1.4 T) situated 2.5 <z< 3 m as shown in Fig. 1. At the operating frequency of 8.5 MHz, it is typical that ω/ω_{ci} = 0.8, where ω is the angular frequency of the RF source and ω_{ci} is the gyrofrequency of deuterium ions. Waves having this polarization are launched in the “downstream” direction, which corresponds to the direction of the magnetic field B, the direction towards the target. The waves damp at the fundamental ion resonance, which for the present magnetic field configuration is located 2–5 cm downstream from the end of the antenna. Pulse lengths are 500 ms for the helicon and 200 ms for the ICH pulse that occurs 300 ms into the helicon pulse. Figure 3 shows power traces in time for the helicon and ICH, and the integration timing for the spectral data collection.
Proto-MPEX employs a suite of diagnostics that can be used to determine plasma conditions and parameters of each shot. A detailed list of the diagnostics is described in full detail by Caughman et_al [16] Here, we describe only those pertinent to the present analysis.
Thomson scattering ∼4 cm in front of the target has been used to measure the electron density and temperature. The viewing ports are 0.75 cm apart vertically and the collection times are every 100 ms.
Proto-MPEX has over one-hundred lines of sight for optical viewing but only five spectral profiles at a time are simultaneously measured with a McPherson 2051 Czerny-Turner 1-m spectrometer using a set of optical fibers. An 1800 grooves/mm grating and a slit width of 30 μm are employed for all measurements. The spectra are recorded by a Princeton Instruments PhotonMAX 512b EMCCD camera. The CCD camera has 512 × 512 pixels that are binned into five groups. Each bin of pixels corresponds to a 38.4 Å wide viewing range or a resolution of 0.075 Å. Spectra are acquired throughout the time of the helicon pulse every 50 ms, with a 50 ms integration time. The integration windows chosen for the ion temperature comparisons with and without ICH are shown in Fig. 3, with two before the ICH and two during the ICH. Time was allowed both after plasma startup and after the ICH was switched on for the plasma to reach equilibrium.
The instrument function for the spectrometer system is determined from an argon pen lamp, which emits very narrow spectral transitions. It is modeled as a Gaussian distribution with a full-width at half-maximum of about 0.25 Å, which corresponds to a 3 eV temperature for argon ions. Thus, measured temperatures, which are of the order of a few eV, often contribute only a small fraction to the total line profile and uncertainties can be up to 1.0 eV (standard deviation of measured temperatures) depending upon the number of counts observed in the spectra. See Appendix A for more details.
The optical fibers can simultaneously collect spectra on any combination of five viewing ports. Locations for the fibers have been chosen based on their geometry relative to the ICH launch antenna. One fiber view goes through the midplane port (y = 0) at the “Probe A” location, 172 cm from the target and −64 cm from the center of the ICH antenna, which is upstream from the ICH antenna. Three fibers are located at the “Probe B” position or 72 cm from the target and 24 cm from the center of the ICH antenna, which is downstream from the ICH antenna. One of these has a view through the midplane; the other two have diagonal views with impact parameters of ±3.6 cm as shown in Fig. 4. The fifth fiber is at the “Probe C” location 40 cm from the target at y = 0 cm and 32 cm from the center of the ICH antenna, which is farther downstream from the ICH antenna. Viewing dumps are installed at each location of interest to remove spurious reflected signals from outside the direct viewing region. All viewing locations are at locations of 1 T or lower magnetic field.
III. ELECTRON AND ION TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS
Ion temperature measurements were made for a set of 20 shots under identical conditions. The magnetic field profile was as shown in Fig. 1, and the helicon and ICH power time profiles were as shown in Fig. 3. Deuterium gas at a flow rate of 2540 SCCM was introduced beginning 300 ms before the helicon pulse and reduced to a constant flow of 740 SCCM at the start of the pulse. Ar gas was flowed in continuously, resulting in a pressure of 0.3 Pa at the location of spectroscopic measurements before the D gas flow was initiated. The maximum total gas pressure at this location was observed immediately before the helicon pulse, having a pressure of 2 Pa.
Typical electron temperature and density obtained from the Thomson scattering is shown in Fig. 5 for the target location, both with and without the presence of ICH. The laser is pulsed at times of 4.405 s for the without ICH condition and at 4.605 s for the with ICH condition. A decrease in electron density and an increase in electron temperature are seen throughout this experiment in Proto-MPEX when ICH is present.
The 4806 Å ^{4}P^{o}_{5/2} to ^{4}P_{5/2} Ar II line is used for spectral analysis. In addition to the Doppler width, the measured line shape is broadened by the instrument profile and the Zeeman splitting in the magnetic field. In fact, these latter two contributions usually dominate the profile. The 4806 Å line exhibits a simple Zeeman pattern with the central pi-component polarized parallel to the magnetic field and two sigma-components polarized perpendicular to the field on either side of the pi-component. The sigma components were removed from the profile by using appropriate polarizers. The reduction in light from the polarizers (∼50%) necessitates integration times of 50 ms to achieve a sufficient signal to noise ratio.
Because the line broadening is often small compared to the instrument profile, two techniques have been used for determining the ion temperatures in order to improve confidence in the interpretation of the data. One method calculates a sequence of assumed temperature profiles assuming a low field approximation and using a single Gaussian fit, convolves these with the instrument profile, and finds the least squared best fit to the measured data [17]. Isler et_al, performed this fitting with the low-field approximation [18] and McLean et_al's, intermediate fields [19] analysis and saw no large error between the two fitting methods. A further description of the applicability of the low field approximation and the reasoning for measuring only the pi components is given in Appendix A. The second method deconvolves the modeled instrument profile from the data using a maximum entropy analysis [20] to obtain the true line emission profile; the temperature is then calculated directly from the spectral width [21]. The two methods were found to yield similar results.
An example using the two techniques is shown in Fig. 6, which illustrates fitting to the raw Ar II data to obtain temperatures for times before and during the ICH pulse. The number of points chosen to be fit for each profile has been chosen based on the lowest residuals found from the fits. The solid circles are the experimental results with a background subtraction. The dotted lines in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) are the instrumental profile, and the solid lines represent the best fits to the highest 7–9 points of the data. The dominance of the instrument function on the line width is evident, and 1 eV represents a lower limit for having confidence in any analysis. The profile in Fig. 6(b), with the ICH operating, is clearly broader than that shown in Fig. 6(a) when only the helicon heating is active. This comparison shows the largest difference that has been observed between a pair of shots.
The deconvolution analysis for the same pair of shots is illustrated in Figs. 6(c) and 6(d), where the dashed lines are the calculated true emission profiles. The goodness of the fit is estimated by reconvolving the inferred emission profile and determining how closely the experimental data (solid circles) match the values of the convolution (open squares). The points do not overlap completely but, overall, the calculated emission profiles are accurate enough to obtain reliable estimates of the ion temperature. In general, after averaging over all shots, the temperatures inferred for the plasmas with ICH heating differ by about 5%, whereas the helicon-only data differ by about 20% between the two methods of analysis.
Using the first of these methods (see Appendix A for further details), ion temperature results were obtained for the 20 shot sequence. Figure 7(a) shows the axial variation in ion temperature present, while Fig. 7(b) shows the radial variation, for both the “with” and “without” ICH cases. The spectra that were taken along the central view at the “Probe B” and “Probe C” location during Helicon only timeframes could not be fit owning to being below the range for confidence. The error comes from the standard deviation from shots at the same conditions which is 1 eV. The error on the instrument function makes up the main component of this error.
IV. DISCUSSION
From Fig. 5, when ICH is present, the electron temperature increases, as has been observed in previous experiments [22,23]. Figure 7 shows ion temperatures of a few eV in the central plasma at the “Probe A” location for both the with and without ICH cases, with no increase in T_{i} seen during the ICH pulse. The temperature with ICH at the “Probe B” center location is similar to the “Probe A” location's temperatures with ICH, but prior to the ICH no fit could be obtained. The “Probe C” center location also gives no fit for the no ICH case but during the ICH case, a small temperature is measured, with an ensemble average of 0.2 eV, but this is essentially zero given the fitting uncertainty of ±1 eV. Since the electron temperature does not decline by a similar amount, this may be due to ion energy loss due to charge exchange. Recycling at the target produces a high neutral pressure in this region in comparison to that at the ion cyclotron resonance. Experiments to investigate the neutral pressure effect on ion heating are being conducted and will be presented elsewhere.
The largest temperature increases at the “Probe B” location with ICH input are observed along the top and bottom views through the plasma periphery where the density is the lowest. This result suggests that the power is absorbed preferentially in the edge. Relaxation times are shorter on the edges at this higher density region and likely contribute to the increased ion temperature as well as electron temperature.
We have used the ANTENA 1-D RF propagation and power absorption code [24] to model wave propagation in the antenna region. It allows for radial variation of the magnetic field and plasma parameters but assumes that they remain constant in the axial direction. This program is useful to model radial wave propagation close to the antenna, but because parameters are considered constant axially, cannot accurately model absorption in the resonance region.
Figure 8 shows the shape of the magnetic field strength profile at the location of the antenna and at the downstream ion cyclotron resonance. The average value used in the analysis is ∼1.4 T, corresponding to a value of ω/ω_{ci} ∼ 0.8 at the antenna location. This is very slightly lower than the value at the time of the experiment of ∼1.45 T (Fig. 1). The dashed rectangle denotes the axial extent of the antenna, and the location of the resonance by the heavy vertical line at Z = 3.49 m. The solid rectangles indicate locations of the nearby magnetic field coils. The distance between the end of the antenna and the resonance at ω/ω_{ci} =1 is 5 cm. The version of the ANTENA code we have used originally did not include helical antennas, but we have added an antenna with this geometry, using the expression for a filamentary helical antenna found in Ref [25]. The vacuum spectrum for the antenna is plotted in Fig. 9(a).
Looking at wave propagation, using the cold plasma dispersion relation for an infinite magnetized plasma, the conventional Stix notation [26] shows the slow wave propagates radially for k_{ǁ} values between the left-hand cutoff given by the expression n_{ǁ}^{2}= L and the Alfven resonance given by n_{ǁ}^{2}= S. These values are plotted in Fig. 9(b) as a function of n_{e}, for deuterium, with |B | = 1.4 T. The dashed lines in both figures indicate the range of parallel wavenumbers centered on the k_{ǁ} ∼ 21 m^{−1} spectral peak over which 50% of the power from the antenna is launched. It can be seen from Fig. 10(b) that in this region accessible densities are in the range of 8 × 10^{18} m^{−3} ≤ n_{e} ≤ 3 × 10^{19} m^{−3}. Comparing to the density profile illustrated in Fig. 5, the slow wave will propagate through the core plasma, but there is a small evanescent region at the edge where the density dips below the L cutoff value. To further test the low-density case for observations of ion heating, a retarding field energy analyzer (RFEA) was used to measure the ion energy distribution (IED) (see Appendix B for further details).
The ANTENA code results confirm that significant power can be coupled to the core plasma for the existing antenna. This can be seen in Fig. 10. The solid line is a radial profile of |E^{+}|^{2}, which is proportional to the absorbed power, for the present antenna length of 25 cm. However, it indicates similar power densities at the edges and the core, whereas the ion temperature appears peaked at the edge.
There is a possibility of improving the propagation. By shortening the antenna somewhat, the spectrum can be shifted to higher values, allowing coupling to higher n_{e}, as well as improving the coupling at the present value. The dashed line in the figure shows a similar profile, but for a 15 cm long helical antenna. In this case, peaking is seen at the edge, but there is substantially increased power density in the core as well in comparison to the case with the longer antenna.
The observed temperatures are still approaching those required for PMI work on refractory metals, although they currently are in the range of sputtering for graphite samples. These temperatures are higher than previously observed on other linear devices without the biasing of the samples [7,27]. A shorter antenna is being developed that will be external to the vacuum and will be able to provide increased ICH launch power. Also, methods have been explored to reduce the neutral pressure in the ICH resonance region, which should minimize power loss through charge exchange. These changes are expected to bring the temperatures in Proto-MPEX to ∼20 eV where they would be relevant to PMI research conditions.
V. CONCLUSION
Two methods for measuring ion temperatures from the 4806 Å Ar II spectra, best fits to the measured profile and maximum-entropy deconvolution, have been used for proto-MPEX plasmas and have shown sufficient agreement with each other to have confidence in the ion temperature measurements. A set of ion temperature measurements has been obtained on Proto-MPEX both before and during ICH for an otherwise fixed set of conditions. For these conditions, the maximum measured temperatures in the Proto-MPEX linear plasma device with a helicon-only plasma is found to be 5 ± 1 eV, and increases by 6 ± 2 eV with ICH present. These values are observed ∼11.5 cm downstream from the end of the antenna at locations viewing the edge plasma. Smaller increases are observed at this axial location in the center of the plasma. A measurable T_{i} value of 3 ± 1 eV is observed upstream from the antenna, but very little change is observed on average when ICH is applied. For these experiments, the ion temperature near the target appears to be too low to be measurable using the current techniques for the without ICH present cases. The with ICH present cases have a small amount of line broadening observed but the measured temperature is approximately zero given the uncertainty in the fit. A 1-D RF antenna model has produced radial profiles of the electric field component coupling to ions that is qualitatively consistent with the measurements. The ion temperatures are not high enough yet for fusion-relevant PMI research, but improvements are being made to achieve the conditions. The achieved temperatures are greater than those in current linear devices with unbiased samples.
APPENDIX A: AR 480.6 NM EMISSION AND LINE FITTING TECHNIQUE
The 4806 Å Ar II transition (^{4}P^{o}_{5/2} to ^{4}P_{5/2}) was chosen for the spectroscopic measurement of the ion temperature using Doppler broadening for two reasons. First, the emission intensity was sufficient for an adequate signal to noise ratio. Second, the broadening/splitting due to the magnetic field can be eliminated by observing emission having a polarization vector parallel to the magnetic field, the so-called π-polarization. A measurement of the π-polarization spectral line profile of the 4806 Å Ar II transition is, therefore, a direct measurement of the ion temperature after a deconvolution of the spectroscopic system's instrument function. Emission having a polarization vector perpendicular to the magnetic field, σ-polarization, experiences the typical Zeeman splitting. The σ-polarization is eliminated by the use of a polarization optic whose axis is aligned parallel to the magnetic field associated with proto-MPEX. Figure 11 depicts the energy of the upper and lower level magnetic substates (^{4}P^{o} and ^{4}P, respectively) experiencing a 1.0 T magnetic field. The solid red lines indicate the six transitions associated with the π-polarization and the solid blue lines indicate the ten transitions associated with the σ-polarization of the 4806 Å Ar II spectral line.
The transitions associated with the π-polarization connect magnetic substates from the upper to lower levels whose projection of the total angular momentum quantum number, m_{J}, does not change (Δm_{J} =0). The transitions associated with the σ-polarization connect magnetic substates from the upper to lower levels whose m_{J} changes by 1 (Δm_{J} =±1). These calculations were conducted using the Explicit Zeeman Stark Spectral Simulation (EZSSS) code [17]. EZSSS calculates an all orders solution to the Schrodinger equation containing both magnetic and electric field vector operators. The transition probabilities are then calculated using the first order time dependent perturbation theory.
When a magnetic field is not present, the energy of all magnetic substates having similar quantum numbers except the projection of the total angular momentum, m_{J}, is degenerate. Upon application of a magnetic field, this degeneracy is completed lifted, a change on the order of 100 μeV for a 1 T magnetic field. For a magnetic field intensity less than 10's of Tesla, the energy coupling of magnetic substates having a different total angular momentum quantum number, J, is very weak yielding an essentially diagonal Hamiltonian matrix associated with the complete magnetic field operator. The coupling is weak in this magnetic field range because energy difference of the magnetic substates having different J's is very large compared to the effect of the magnetic field, approximately two orders of magnitude. Due to the weak coupling, the energy of the magnetic substates responds linearly to the magnetic field. Figure 12 highlights this response by depicting the energy of the magnetic substates for J = 5/2 experiencing a 1 T magnetic field. Due to the weak coupling, the change in energy due to the magnetic field is equivalent for all m_{J}'s having an identical J and for both the upper and lower levels.
The spectral line profile is calculated by convoluting the delta functions calculated by the EZSSS code (upper and lower level magnetic substate energy difference and transition probability) with the instrument and Doppler broadening. Figure 13 depicts the spectral line profile for both the π and σ-polarizations of the 4806 Å Ar II transition experiencing a magnetic field of 1 T. The spectral line broadening mechanisms implemented in the simulation were instrument and Doppler. The instrument broadening is set to that associated with the spectroscopic equipment used for this work, Gaussian with a FWHM of 0.25 Å and the Doppler broadening is that associated with a 3 eV ion. As depicted by the energy level diagrams shown in Fig. 11, the π-polarization spectral line profile contains six transitions all having an identical wavelength. The σ-polarization contains ten transitions; however, there are only two unique wavelength values arising from Δm_{J} = +1 and Δm_{J} = −1.
Due to the fact that the σ-polarization is eliminated by use of a polarizer and the π-polarization can be treated as a single delta function in the magnetic field range of interest, the quantum mechanical calculation performed within the EZSSS code is not required. The ion temperature can be extracted by deconvoluting the experimentally measured π-polarization spectral line profile with the instrument function. For the data presented in this paper, the Doppler broadening is accurately described by a single temperature Gaussian distribution function. The ion temperature is calculated from the FWHM of the Gaussian using the following equation:
where m is the mass of the Ar II ion, c is the speed of light, e is the charge of the electron, λ is the center wavelength of the transition (4806 Å), and FWHM is the full width half maximum of the Gaussian function. The ion temperature kT_{Ar II} is in units of eV. For the data presented in this paper, the Doppler broadening is accurately described by a single distribution. Second, the theoretical spectrum is integrated over the pixel dimensions of the spectroscopic camera and the reduced χ between the experimental and pixelated theoretical spectrum is calculated. Finally, the ion temperature is determined by selecting the pixelated theoretical spectrum having the minimum reduced χ.
APPENDIX B: SUPPORTING RFEA RESULTS
RFEA data were collected for a deuterium only plasma at a density of ∼8 × 10^{18} m^{−3} for a similar magnetic field as shown in Fig. 1. No argon was included so that the assumption of a singularly ionized plasma could be made. The density is reduced by slight reduction in the magnetic field under the helicon antenna and reduction in power to 70 kW. The RFEA consists of a 0.79 mm diameter grounded entrance aperture covered with a 5% transparent nickel grid. The hole size of the grid is ∼40 μm. Following the entrance grid is a 40% transparent discriminator grid, a 40% transparent negatively biased electron suppression grid, and the ion collector plate. The grid spacing inside the analyzer is 0.64 mm. The voltage of the discriminator grid was swept from −10 V to +90 V to measure the ion energy distribution with and without the presence of ICH, and the suppression grid had a constant applied voltage of −250 V. The RFEA is mounted on a probe drive at the “Probe B” location to measure the ion current-voltage profiles in the horizontal direction through the plasma column while maintaining the vertical position of 0 cm from the plasma center.
The data taken at the horizontal plasma radius of 2 cm to 0 cm for conditions with and without the presence of ICH are shown in Fig. 14. The ion energy distribution is also shown for the radius of 0 cm case. A clear broadening in the collected current and a shift in the ion energy distribution can be seen with the ICH present which extends from the edge (r = 2 cm) into the core (r = 0 cm). This broadening in the current collected and IED increases when ICH is present shows that the ion temperature population moves to an overall higher energy state. The IED shows that a larger population of 10–25 eV ions is present when the ICH is on, and the largest population of ions centered between 0 and 10 eV when the ICH is not present. These results are concurrent with the high density spectroscopically measured ion temperatures being higher in the edges were the density is lower. Future experiments are planned for high density RFEA measurements.
FIG. 1. 
A cross-section of the Proto-MPEX experiment and axial magnetic field strength with the 12 magnets shown as red boxes in standard operating conditions. The probe locations mark the optical viewing locations used in this experiment.
FIG. 2. 
ICH antenna, (a) outside of the vacuum vessel and (b) after mounting inside the vacuum vessel.
FIG. 3. 
Power traces for the Helicon and ICH along with the integration starting times used for collecting spectral data. The integration times used are 50 ms.
FIG. 4. 
The line of sight viewing angle downstream from the ICH antenna. The bottom viewing chord is represented by the dotted line and P is the perpendicular distance from the plasma center to this chord.
FIG. 5. 
Electron temperature and density from Thomson scattering taken 4 cm in front of the target with and without ICH cases. The error comes from standard deviation of 5 shot ensembles.
FIG. 6. 
Profiles for the maximum temperature difference observed at the “Probe B” top viewing location from a pair of similar shots using the line fitting technique are shown in (a) and (b) with and without ICH. The solid circles are the experimental data with the background subtracted, the solid curves are the best fits, and the dotted lines are the instrument profiles. Deconvolved profiles are shown by the dashed lines in (c) and (d). The open squares are the values of the reconvolved profiles at the wavelengths of the experimental data.
FIG. 7. 
Ion temperatures (a) axially and (b) radially along the machine with and without 16 kW input ICH power using the line fitting technique. The error bars are the standard deviation of the shot ensemble.
FIG. 8. 
Magnetic field profile in the ICH region of Proto-MPEX.
FIG. 9. 
(a) Vacuum spectrum for the 25 cm long half-turn helical antenna and (b) density values for Alfven resonance and left-hand cutoff as a function of parallel wavenumber for deuterium plasma with f = 8.5 MHz and B = 1.4 T.
FIG. 10. 
Radial profiles of |E^{+}|^{2} absorbed power normalized to the maximum value for two different lengths of the half-turn helical antenna, f = 8.5 MHz, B = 1.4 T, n_{e}_{0} = 1.5 × 10^{19} m^{−3}, T_{e} = 5 eV, and T_{i} = 1 eV. The n_{e} profile is parabolic with a radius of 1.75 cm. The location is 5 cm downstream from the antenna (approximate resonance location).
FIG. 11. 
Energy of the magnetic substates associated with the ^{4}P^{o} upper level (top) and the ^{4}P lower level (bottom) of the Ar II ion experiencing a magnetic field of 1.0 T. The energy spacing between the upper and lower levels is not to scale to highlight the energy difference associated with the magnetic substates within a given level.
FIG. 12. 
Energy of the ^{4}P^{o}_{5/2} magnetic substates (upper level with J = 5/2) associated with the Ar II ion experiencing a magnetic field of 1.0 T. The energy of the ^{4}P_{5/2} magnetic substates (lower level with J = 5/2) is equivalent at 1.0 T.
FIG. 13. 
The spectral line profile associated with the π and σ-polarizations of the 4806 Å Ar II transition experiencing a magnetic field of 1 T as calculated by the EZSSS code. The spectral line broadening mechanisms were instrument (Gaussian 0.25 Å FWHM) and Doppler (3 eV).
FIG. 14. 
The “Probe B” location retarding the field energy analyzer normalized current collected for with and without ICH present at a horizontal radius of (a) r = 2 cm, (b) r = 1.5 cm, (c) r = 1.0 cm, (d) r = 0.5 cm, (e) r= 0 cm, and (f) the ion energy distribution for the center of the plasma column at r =0 cm.
