Effect of alumina coatings on corrosion protection of steels in molten lead
Lead alloys are attractive candidates as coolants for future generation nuclear reactors (fast reactors). Unfortunately, they easily corrode structural steels of reactors. To mitigate this phenomenon, surface protective coatings may be applied. In this study, T91 steel (Cr9Mo1) samples were coated with aluminum oxide coatings (Al-O) deposited by radio frequency magnetron sputtering. The alumina coatings were characterized using scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction, and tribological techniques. A corrosion test of coated steel samples was performed in stagnant lead at 550 °C for 1200 h and none of the samples revealed corrosion signs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Lead alloys are considered very interesting materials for applications as coolants for next generation nuclear reactors [1]. Indeed, they offer a number of attractive chemical, thermal, physical, and nuclear properties such as chemical inertness with air and water, low vapor pressure over the relevant temperature range, high boiling point, and high atomic number. However, one of the main concerns with the use of liquid metals is their compatibility with the containment structure. Lead is actually very corrosive to common steels used in nuclear plants. This has been widely recognized as a critical issue to be solved before accepting a general use of lead coolants.
Moreover, it is well known that the corrosion behavior of steels depends on the oxygen concentration in the liquid Pb [2]. Yeliseyeva et_al [3] have determined different interaction modes of steels which change from the dissolution in lead, when the oxygen content in the melt is Co ≤ 10^{−10} wt. %, to the formation of protective oxide layer on the surface of steel, when the oxygen concentration is approximately between 10^{−6} and 10^{−4} (in wt. %), i.e., the so-called “oxygen-added Pb” or “mixed domain.” [4] Under these conditions neither a severe oxidation accompanied by formation of thick multilayer scale, that could inhibit further oxidation and prevent a direct contact between the material and the molten metal, nor the dissolution of steel and intergranular penetration of liquid Pb should occur. This can be attributed to the low oxygen concentrations that may hinder the formation a protective oxide layer. On the other hand, at Co ≥ 10^{−3} wt. % [5,6], indicating a saturation of molten Pb by oxygen, the formation of multiphase oxide scales [3] can occur, not necessary protective.
Therefore, in order to limit the corrosion risk for structural materials, the most used protection method up to 500 °C consists in the fine control of oxygen dissolution in Pb and lead–bismuth eutectic (LBE). Indeed, the oxygen content should be high enough to allow a stable oxidation of the structural material, but it should remain below a threshold not to promote the precipitation of lead oxide (Ref [2], Chaps. 4 and 6). Surface engineering and, in particular, surface alloying and protective coatings could allow working in a wider range of oxygen potentials. Although the formation of protective oxide films under mixed domain conditions is effective in preserving corrosion resistance in heavy liquid metals (HLMs), austenitic steels suffer from severe corrosion attack in lead, at temperatures above 500 °C. Indeed, at a high temperature, the formation of a nonprotective and nonstable double-layered oxide was observed [2,7,8]. In addition, ferritic/martensitic steels form thick oxide scales that periodically may spall off plugging the cooling channels [8]. Finally, even when a compact layer of chromium oxide is formed, it was reported to quickly dissolve at about 500 °C [9]. For a typical unprotected austenitic steel exposed to liquid lead, the dissolutive process can proceed at the speed of 200 μm/yr at 550 °C and 10^{−7} wt. % oxygen [2]. Therefore, the surface engineering method is studied in order to increase the operating temperatures above 500 °C without serious corrosion. Even in this case, the corrosion mitigation strategy involves the growth of a passivating and adherent layer, containing strong oxide-forming elements (e.g., Al, Si) (Ref [2], Chaps. 4 and 6). Rivai and Takahashi [10] reported the results observed on the samples of high Cr steels uncoated and coated with Al-Fe layer and subsequently processed under the same operating conditions. A very thin oxide layer was formed on the surface of the coating which was stable at least for 1000 h, protecting the steel from both LBE and lead attack. Similar studies on the effectiveness of the surface treatment of steels with various aluminum alloying techniques have been reported [11–16].
Overlay coatings represent an attractive solution to overcome this problem in the short-term since there are several well-known technologies industrially used to protect steels. FeAl based films, Si and Al oxides, Cr, Ti, Si, and Zr nitrides and carbides have been deposited using different techniques such as vacuum plasma spray, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and PVD oxide (Ref [2], Chap. 9, and references therein) [17]. However, specific tests in HLMs are still required. Serious consideration must be given not only to microstructural and compositional characteristics that favor corrosion resistance but also to adhesion, which is equally paramount. Indeed, the areas that are most prone to degradation are located at the interfaces coating/environment and coating/substrate.
The sputtering techniques are among the most used since they allow the production of high quality and dense coatings with the ability to adjust the chemical composition in a wide range. Reactive sputtering is carried out in order to deposit compounds (i.e., oxides or nitrides) by introducing into the process chamber a gas or a mixture of gases that reacts with the target material to form a coating of a desired chemical composition. Sputtered [18–21] and reactively sputtered films [22,23] were extensively studied due to their useful properties such as chemical inertness, mechanical strength, and hardness. Concerning material selection, in recent years, aluminum oxide films received great attention, since the alumina is a highly insulating material and shows low ion mobility. Therefore, an alumina layer can inhibit a further oxide growth acting as an effective oxygen diffusion barrier. Nowadays, thin films of aluminum oxide are widely used in different industrial applications from microelectronic and optical applications to wear and corrosion protection [24–26].
In this research work, aluminalike thin films were deposited in a radio frequency magnetron sputtering (RF-MS) reactor by sputtering an aluminum target in an oxygen/argon atmosphere. This PVD technology is known to be one of the excellent methods for the production of insulating coatings such as oxides and nitrides [27]. The corrosion resistance was tested by the exposure of bare and coated T91 steel substrates to static molten lead at 550 °C for 1200 h.
The morphology, chemical composition, crystalline structure, and mechanical and tribological properties of films, before and after the molten lead test, were deeply investigated. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) were used to evaluate the surface morphology and to measure the elemental distribution along each films thickness. Wear tests in dry conditions, scratch tests, and nanoindentation measurements were carried out to evaluate the effects of molten lead on the mechanical properties.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Coating deposition
T91 steel (nominal composition Cr 8.3, Ni 0.13, Mo 0.95, Mn 0.4, V 0.2, Nb 0.08, Si 0.4, N 0.02, C 0.11, Fe Balance in wt. %) rectangular substrates and specimens were cut to a dimension of approximately 10 × 20 × 4 mm. Before deposition, the substrates were polished to a 1 μm diamond finish and then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with acetone, water rinsed, and finally dried in nitrogen flux.
Al-O coatings were deposited by RF-MS (13.56 MHz), using an Al target (99.99% purity) with 3-in. diameter. The substrates were placed onto the grounded sample holder under the RF powered electrode. Prior to deposition, the chamber was evacuated to a pressure lower than 1 × 10^{−5} Pa and the substrate temperature was monitored by means of a thermocouple placed in contact with the sample. Thin films depositions were carried out at 260 °C. Argon (99.999%) as working gas and oxygen (99.999%) as reactive gas were introduced into the chamber through a mass flow controller and the O_{2} flow was fixed at 11%. The total gas pressure and total gas flow rate were fixed at 1 Pa and 20 sccm, respectively. The target to substrate distance was kept constant at 45 mm. In Table I, the mainly used working parameters for alumina coating deposition are shown.
B. Corrosion tests
Corrosion tests in stagnant liquid lead were carried out in the Corrosion Apparatus for Liquid metal experimental facility [28]. It is characterized by a 25 cm diameter vacuum chamber, which contains a furnace enclosed using an alumina case with a Kanthal A1 resistance, which can be heated up to 1030 °C. A K-type thermocouple operates as feedback for the temperature controller, which ensures an accuracy of ±3 K. An Al_{2}O_{3} crucible (20 × 30 mm) contains the liquid metal bath. The apparatus is equipped with both a primary vacuum system and with a gas feed to maintain a controlled inert atmosphere inside the experimental chamber. The oxygen partial pressure of the gas above the liquid level is monitored by a solid-state electrode. The sensor is an electrochemical ZrO_{2} microgauge (SETNAG^{®}) with built in Pd/PdO metallic reference. By fluxing the high purity Ar (99.9999 at. %), the resulting oxygen partial pressure in the atmosphere surrounding the samples was measured 10^{−2} Pa, which corresponds to an oxygen content in the bath of about 10^{−6} wt. %.
The steel samples (20 × 12 × 3 mm) are immersed in the lead bath for about 2/3 of their length by the push-pull feedthrough only when both the atmosphere inside the chamber and the desired temperature of the bath are reached. An uncoated T91 sample (as reference) and an Al-O coated substrate have been simultaneously immersed in the lead bath at T = 550 °C and maintained under equilibrium conditions for an exposure time of 1200 h. The uncoated T91 sample was previously metallographically polished and ultrasonic cleaned in an ethanol bath. After the required exposure time, the samples were pulled out from the bath and the apparatus was cooled. The two samples were not chemically etched to remove the residual adherent lead but directly prepared for the microscopic analyses by applying a standard procedure for a cross-section metallographic analysis [Ref [2], Chap. 6 (Par 6.7.3)].
C. Coatings characterizations
The coating thickness was evaluated by means of ball crater microabrasion method by a Calotest (CSM Instruments now Anton Paar). ImageJ software [29] was used to carry out image analysis and measure the geometrical parameters of the obtained tracks. The average coating thickness was calculated from the equation described by Fildes et_al [30]
The morphology and microstructure of samples before and after oxidation in the molten metal were analyzed by a Sigma Zeiss field emission SEM, equipped with an Oxford X-Max EDS system. SEM-EDS was also used to assess the elemental distribution along the film thickness.
The crystalline phases in the specimens were identified by using x-ray diffraction (XRD), with a Philips PW 3710 diffractometer operating in a Bragg–Brentano geometry and equipped with a Cu-Kα source (40 kV, 30 mA). Spectra were first evaluated with match! 2.2.1 software to identify the crystalline phases from the position of the detected peaks. Data were elaborated with maud 2.46 software [31,32] to measure the mean grain size and cell parameters through the iterations of Rietveld method, applied to peaks' broadening and positions [33].
Adhesion was investigated by performing scratch tests using an UMT-2 tribotester (CETR now Bruker), equipped with a standard Rockwell C diamond indenter (angle 120° and spherical tip radius 200 μm). The measurements were performed in compliance with the European UNI EN 1071-3 standard [34] for ceramic materials in progressive loading scratch test (PLST) mode. The coating/substrate adhesion was quantified through the failure critical load Lc3, at which adhesive failure was initiated due to the coating delamination.
Tribological tests to evaluate friction and wear behavior were carried out in dry conditions with the UMT-2 tribotester, set for pure sliding contact. Ball-on-flat geometry was chosen, in order to achieve a 1 GPa Hertzian contact pressure on coupled surfaces, thanks to a nonconformal contact type. Five millimeter diameter alumina balls with hardness in the range of 1250–1700 HV were used as counterparts. The wear tests were conducted up to 3500 cycles at a speed of 10 mm·s^{−1} and a frequency of 1 Hz.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This work is aimed at checking the effectiveness of alumina coatings in the protection against corrosion by molten lead of T91 steel structural elements. The RF-MS technique has been chosen in order to grow a nonconductive material.
A. Corrosion test
The effectiveness of the coatings was tested in an environment simulating the operating conditions for a sufficiently long time to get reliable results. In Fig. 1, T91 specimens {uncoated [Fig. 1(a)] and with Al-O coating [Fig. 1(b)]} are presented after 1200 h testing in molten lead at 550 °C. The uncoated substrate is shown in Fig. 1(a) and appeared evidently corroded after the experiment, since a thick nonadherent oxide scale was produced and it diffusely detached from the bulk. On the contrary, from a macroscopic point of view, the Al-O coated sample [Fig. 1(b)] did not seem to have suffered apparent modifications.
B. Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy
As previously mentioned, all the samples were analyzed just after the extraction from the crucible. No etching treatment was performed to remove possible residual lead. No additional oxide layer was detected above the Al-O coating after the Pb test. Top view SEM images (Fig. 2) of the Al-O sample in the as deposited state and after molten Pb test did not show any significant changes of the sample surface morphology, except for negligible amounts of residual solidified lead detected just in some restricted areas. Both the samples showed the typical surface morphology of a dense, nanostructured PVD film. It could be deduced that aluminalike deposited coating is only slightly wetted by liquid lead. On the contrary, EDS analyses (Table II) pointed out an oxygen content decrease. Since aluminum has a greater affinity for oxygen than lead, the reason for this oxygen content drop within the coating needs a further investigation.
Moreover, considering EDS results after molten Pb test, the Al-O coating is characterized by a slight increase of metallic elements of the substrate (i.e., Fe and Cr). This proves a little diffusivity of these metallic elements through the coating thickness.
SEM images and EDS elemental profiles of the sample cross section (Fig. 3) confirmed the presence of Al-O film with an uniform distribution of Al and O into the coating. No formation of an oxide scale above the protective coating is detectable. A thickness of 1.5 μm was measured by calotest for as deposited coating. As it can be verified looking at Fig. 3, the coating thickness after the molten Pb test did not change. Coating was still intact, adherent, and compact. The EDS analysis did not show detectable signals of bath elements diffusion through the film toward the steel substrate nor film elements diffusion into the substrate. As a result, T91 was not corroded.
C. X-ray diffraction
XRD structural characterization confirmed that Al-O film was still present after the molten Pb test, and its microstructural properties were unchanged (Fig. 4). For Al-O specimens, γ-phase alumina is usually expected, when the substrate temperature is around 200 °C [35]. Anyway, it was possible to detect just a little crystallized Al_{2}O_{3} phase, presumably monoclinic theta type, for both “as deposited” and “after molten Pb test” samples. The other observed peaks were associated with reflections from the T91 (Ref [36]) substrates.
D. Scratch test
In order to investigate the film/substrate adhesion, scratch tests were also performed. The analyses were carried out by using PLST mode in which the applied normal load increases linearly with time. In Fig. 5, the coefficient of friction (COF) variations as a function of the applied normal load (F_{Z}) are shown. Moreover, the SEM images of the tracks were associated with the experimental curves. As it can be seen for Al-O sample, the failure load (Lc3) decreased after the molten Pb test.
E. Wear
Severe dry wear tests were performed before and after molten Pb test by using an alumina ball as counter-body. For the Al-O sample, after the Pb test, COF increased and coating failed before the as deposited one (Fig. 6).
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Coating deposition is an effective method to protect structural materials of the next generation nuclear reactors against heavy liquid metal corrosion. The preliminary results showed Al-O can be corrosion resistant against liquid lead. RF-MS technology allowed obtaining dense and high performance coatings. From the experimental results, it emerged that the tribological properties of coatings were affected by the molten lead test. Anyway, this did not seem to correlate with the resistance to corrosion. However, further studies are required to clarify this aspect. Further steps to validate the acceptability of such coatings under relevant conditions for fast reactors are in progress (i.e., a 5000 h medium duration corrosion test).
Table I. 
Working parameters set for Al-O coating deposition.
Table II. 
EDS analysis of the top surface of the samples.
Table I. -body
Substrate pretreatment	Ultrasound cleaning	Yes
Plasma etching	Yes
Film deposition parameter	Mean cathode power (W)	100
	Mean cathode power density (W/cm^{2})	2.3
	Pulse frequency (MHz)	13.56
	Gas	Ar + O_{2}
	Total pressure (Pa)	1
	Substrate bias voltage (V)	Grounded
	Deposition temperature (K)	530
	Cathode to substrate distance (mm)	45
	Deposition rate (nm/min)	5
Table II. -body
	As deposited Al-O coating on T91	After molten Pb test
Element	Atomic %	Atomic %
O K	74.0	60.6
Al K	25.0	35.5
Cr K	—	0.4
Fe K	0.8	1.9
Pb M	—	1.4
Fig. 1. 
Samples after 1200 h testing in molten lead at 550 °C: (a) uncoated T91 substrate and (b) Al-O coated sample.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Top view SEM images of T91 substrate (without Al-O coating) before (a) and after (c) the molten lead test. SEM images of T91 substrate with Al-O coating before (b) and after (d) molten lead test. (d) Pb-rich particles are shown as red circles.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) SEM image of the cross section of an Al-O coated sample after exposure test in molten lead. Obtained EDS elemental distribution profiles are visible.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) XRD spectra of T91 substrate (black), as deposited coated sample (blue), and after molten Pb test (red). The patterns are shown in logarithmic scale.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) Progressive load scratch test (PLST): applied load (Fz) and COF vs scratch length for an Al-O sample. The corresponding tracks' SEM images are shown: 1 (as deposited) and 2 (after test).
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) Friction coefficient vs number of cycles-time diagrams of substrate and deposited Al-O coating. As deposited Al-O coating failed after about 300 cycles; molten lead tested Al-O coating failed after about 200 cycles.
