Stress testing of electrically active FlexMEAs with simultaneous electrical recording in fluidic environment: Introduction of a new measurement setup
We present a measurement setup consisting of two fluid-filled pressure chambers to mimic the mechanical stress likely to that of small body movements on biomedical flexible micro-electrode arrays for the analysis of various degradation mechanisms. Our main goal was the simulation of micro-motions in fluid conditions, while maintaining an electric access to the device. These micro-motions would be likely to those occurring in the human body caused by the intracranial pressure in magnitudes of 7-25 mmHg, which translates to a fluid pressure of 9-33 mbar. Furthermore, severe mechanical stress can be administered to the samples under the previously mentioned environment. Therefore, a flexible, polyimide-based sample with various metal test structures was fabricated and analyzed in the presented measurement setup. A comparison of the elongation of the sample’s surface as a function of the applied hydrostatic pressure is given with computer simulations.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, polyimide (PI)-based devices have gained a lot of scientific and medical attention for electrically active implants because of their mechanical and electrical properties. The biocompatibility, as well as biostability, in combination with its high electrical isolation features makes polyimide to be predestined for encapsulating flexible electronics in medical conditions ( [Debelle et_al, 2016]). This allows the creation of flexible, highly specialized multi-electrode devices, such as retina implants or highly flexible, multi-channel cables for implantation ( [Cheng et_al, 2012];  [Hämmerle et_al, 2002];  [Lovell et_al, 2007];  [Maghribi et_al, 2009];  [Poppendieck et_al, 2014];  [Saadatifard et_al, 2014];  [Stieglitz and Gross, 2002];  [Weiland and Humayun, 2003]; and  [Zrenner, 2002]). In all cases, metallic thin films remain on a flexible substrate, which opens issues regarding the functional failure of the complete device ( [Gonzalez et_al, 2008];  [Hsu et_al, 2010]; and  [Li et_al, 2005]).
In addition, as with every medical device, multiple mechanical stability tests, as well as enhanced aging measurements, are necessary to evaluate the stability of the used flexible materials and devices. Rubehn et_al characterized the influence of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) liquid as well as temperature influences on polyimide, proving its chemical stability even up to temperatures of 60 °C ( [Rubehn and Stieglitz, 2010]). The degradation of polyimide has also been in the focus of studies like the work of Murray et_al, which proposed a novel accelerated aging methodology based on their tensile stress tests ( [Murray et_al, 2004]) or the work of Lucchini et_al ( [Lucchini et_al, 2016]), which showed a substantial influence of micro-tensile stress to the delamination of polyimide layers. In conclusions, both studies underline the necessity of accelerated aging measurements under the influence of mechanical stress. Adrega et_al also explained the need for mechanical stress measurements for flexible devices, as they expand their flexible sample material up to 30% without electrical failure occurring on included electrical circuitry ( [Adrega and Lacour, 2010]).
Other studies focus solely on the fact that an implant will remain in a harsh, moist condition and, therefore, examine the moisture uptake of PI films such as the one of Kamalov and Borisova, who measured the charge relaxation inside of polyimide films at high ambient humidity ( [Kamalov and Borisova, 2016]). As a result, they proposed a polytetrafluoroethylene coating to enhance the electret effect of thin flexible PI films based on their work.
Mechanical properties of flexible electronics, i.e., cables or implants, are discussed in the two norms ASTM D882-02 and IPC-TM-650: 2.4.2.1, 2.4.3.1. Here, measurement setups to validate the ductility of flexible electronics are presented. However, the mechanical load is always translated to the sample by direct contact with a test specimen. In addition, none of the established setups combines mechanical load with the influence of a physiological medium onto the test substrates.
In conclusion, no measurement setup has been created to simulate small mechanical bending motions, as would originate from pulsatile fluid flow. Preservation of the electric accessibility to the implant in a fluid environment would be needed in order to gain a maximum amount of insights. Thus, we present a fluid-based measurement setup in which the moisture caused degradation of the self-made devices can be electrically observed. Also, the setup induces controlled artificial mechanical bending movement to the samples, which all takes place in a defined liquid environment. Thus, body conditions with the combination of the effects of mechanical degradation mechanisms and ambient as well as humidity degradation effects are further mimicked in one setup. Necessary samples on a polyimide base were produced to test the measurement setups’ capabilities.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Borosilicate glass from Siegert Wafer of 1 mm thickness was used as substrate material for the flexible test samples. Before spin coating polyimide 2611, from HD Micosystems, a sacrificial titanium layer of 100 nm thickness was sputtered onto the substrate within a Leybold Univex 300. The first polyimide layer is then spin coated onto the substrate with a Convac 1001 spin coater with 500 rpm for 5 s, followed by 3000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. The sample is immediately baked on a hot plate at 90 °C for 90 s, followed by a baking step at 150 °C for another 90 s.
The polyimide covered sample is then heated in a computer-controlled oven with a nitrogen flow of 800–1000 sccm and a temperature ramp of 4 °C/min from room temperature up to 300 °C, where the temperature is held for 30 min. This will result in a 5 μm thick polyimide layer, sitting on top of the sacrificial titanium layer. The following cooling process is also software-controlled with a desired temperature ramp of also 4 °C/min. The achieved cooling temperature ramp differs significantly from the heating ramp and lasts up to 18 h (see Fig. 1).
After curing the polyimide, it was processed with standard photolithography techniques, which we used to obtain the conducting paths. These exist of a 10 nm thick adhesive titanium layer, followed by a 50 nm thick gold layer and a recurrent 10 nm thick titanium adhesive layer, which were all fabricated in situ by vacuum deposition techniques in a Pfeiffer PLS 570. The circuitry is enclosed again by a top polyimide layer, equal to the one underneath. The fabrication process is sketched in Fig. 2. After removal of the sacrificial titanium layer, by dissolving it in ammonium fluoride (NH_{4}F), the finished flexible, polyimide based test sample (see Fig. 3) was achieved.
The sample itself includes several test structures like 17 electrodes with diameters of 250 μm and 500 μm, respectively, and a resistance wire strain with 160 loops, each loop wire being 20 mm long and 20 μm wide, resulting in a total length of 320 cm. All structures are in a local area with a diameter of 24 mm, which is the pressure exposed area of the later introduced measurement setup (see Fig. 8). Normally, an interdigitated structure would be considered for water uptake measurements ( [Von Metzen and Stieglitz, 2013]); however, these samples were intended for bending measurements and water uptake can later on be measured by additional circuitry. Also, two pads for future layer stacking and their electrical contact by interconnections can be seen in the final device as shown in Fig. 3, over which additional circuitry can later be electrically contacted (e.g., interdigitated structures).
The top contact pads were constructed to fit a standard Omron Xf2M-55 connector for easy electrical contact, which was achieved by opening the contact pads via etching the top polyimide in oxygen plasma with an RF power of 100 W and a base pressure of 10 mTorr. The resulting etch rate was 250 nm/min for polyimide 2611 from HD Microsystems. On these samples, the electrodes themselves were not opened.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Setup requirements
Based on the usage—mimicking body conditions as (bending) movement, pressure, humidity on flexible samples while electrically measuring the impact of these influences on the samples—we defined some necessary requirements, which the setup must fulfill:
1. The implants must be fixed securely with an ensured electrical contact but also as gently as possible without leaks occurring in the setup.
2. Visibility of the fixated samples must be ensured to observe the status of the samples.
3. Mechanical stress like that in the physiological spectrum of the human body applied by pressure in ranges of 7-25 mmHg must be simulated precisely ( [Rangel-Castillo et_al, 2008]).
4. The applied pressure must be read out as accurately as possible to observe induced micro-motions with minimal pressure.
5. The system must be suitable for temperature-superimposed accelerated aging measurements under mechanical load.
6. The measurement process must be completely automated and software controllable.
B. Setup fabrication
Fulfilling parts of the first requirement was done designing a pressure chamber out of two separate pressure corpora, with the flexible samples in between. Figure 4 shows a 3D technical drawing with the real pressure chamber next to it. The flexible samples are held in place by self-made printed circuit boards (PCBs) onto which they were connected via Omron Xf2M-55 connectors, which guaranteed the electrical contactability of the first requirement. Pressure resistivity was given by two flat gaskets and proven to be stable at pressures up to 2 bar, which is the maximum that the pressure supply can deliver. As each pressure corpus was made from Plexiglas (PMMA), the second requirement, visibility of the tested sample, was automatically fulfilled. In addition, as the corpora consist of single PMMA blocks out of which the pressure chambers were milled, no predetermined breaking points were created, leading to a higher overall mechanical stability.
A Fluigent MFCS-EZ base system with two 2000 mbar channels with a full-scale pressure sensor resolution of 0.03%, a reading time of 40 ms, and a settling time of 100 ms was used as a pressure supply for both pressure corpora. This allows accurately induced pressure loads in the range of 9-33 mbar, which simulates the intracranial pressure (ICS) precisely and fulfilled the 3rd requirement ( [Rangel-Castillo et_al, 2008]). Furthermore, by utilizing a pressure supply, capable of pressure loads up to 2 bar, the setup is not only capable of inducing micro-motions but also harsh mechanical stress test measurements to the point of tearing the samples.
The resulting chamber pressure is directly measured with Keller series 33X pressure sensors with a pressure detection range of 0 up to 3 bar and a precision of 0.1% at full-scale. This is necessary, as the pressure from the Fluigent base is applied in gaseous nitrogen and translated to the fluid medium and, thus, may differ at the sample site. As a result, the fourth requirement of precise pressure measurements was fulfilled (refer to Sec. III C and Fig. 6).
Figure 4 also shows that it is possible to apply pressure to 3 samples at once, as both pressure corpora inherit 3 pressure chambers which are only divided by the to be tested samples, resulting in a reproducible testing environment for multiple samples. Furthermore, the final setup called FMS [flexible micro-electrode array (Flex-MEA) mechanical stress simulation setup] is also applicable for accelerated aging measurements by heating the contained fluid.
An external electrical measurement setup can be used to acquire signals from the implants through the PCB board connections.
The complete setup, which is sketched in Fig. 5, can be run fully autonomous and computer controlled. De-airing hoses at one end of the pressure corpora let air exhaust, as the corpora are filled with an electrolyte fluid. By programming the Fluigent base system in time and pressure range, the samples can be bend with controllable frequency and strength over a long time span such as days and even weeks and induce mechanical load. Furthermore, this setup is also capable of holding one chamber at a fixed pressure and just alternating the pressure in the other corpus between a fixed and a chosen pressure value, resulting in a one-sided bending of the fixated samples, simulating pulsatile motions very precisely.
A self-written LabView program controls the automatic application of the periodic pressure load while acquiring and analyzing all sensor data, including the pressure of the Fluidic base system, both Keller 33X sensor values, together with the temperature. The combination with an electrical measurement unit is also sketched in Fig. 5, where a Keithley 6517B source measurement unit (SMU) is utilized for electrical characterization of the fixated samples. With a multiplexer relay attached to the SMU, every contact pad on the samples can be connected and measured against each other as well as against a reference electrode placed inside one or both pressure corpora.
C. Setup characterization
In Fig. 6, the hydrostatic pressure is measured in one chamber at the two end points of one pressure corpus (position 1 and 2) every 60 ms while applying a short pressure peak. One can not only see that the pressure was applied over the complete chamber within milliseconds, as it is expected with hydrostatic pressure, but also how small and precise a pressure peak can be read out. Also, the detection precision in ranges of less than Δp = 0.05 mbar is clearly visible and sufficient for all presented applications.
Bending flexible samples requires the pressure to be built up and released again in one or both chambers. This is shown in Fig. 7, where both chambers were pressure controlled in a range of ±100 mbar, respectively. One can see the Fluigent induced load as well as the resulting pressure difference (indicated in red) between both chambers, acquired from the Keller sensors. The negative pressure on the y-axis arises, as it is seen from one chamber, when the other one is loaded. As the Fluigent base system can only actively increase the pressure, venting a channel takes longer, if the pressure is closer to the atmospheric pressure. This can be circumvented by setting the base pressure of the complete system to a higher value like 1500 mbar, so the difference to normal atmosphere is more significant and therefore venting of channels is accelerated. However, due to the nature of the measurements, no negative effect of this has been experienced.
Pressure-exposed substrates are visibly bent after they are removed from the setup. Of high interest are the effects of the bending and surface elongation on the samples. Thus, the effect of the applied pressure to the mechanical elongation of our polyimide as well as standard polypropylene foils has been simulated. The polypropylene foils were used to verify the correctness of the simulations as they allow for a higher elongation with the given circumstances, thus simplifying analysis and characterization.
D. Comparison of bend samples to computer simulations
Figure 8 shows a simulation of a one-sided pressure of 50 mbar. The pressure was applied to polyimide samples. Different pressure values on polypropylene as well as our polyimide foils with the software ANSYS (ANSYS, Inc., Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, USA) were simulated and the height profiles were obtained, as seen in Fig. 9 for each simulated pressure,
The profile was best fitted with a polynomial equation to the power of 9 [as one is shown in Eq. (1)], which was done for every simulation in Matlab. The function parameters of the profile shown in Fig. 9 are given in Table I with a confidence of 95%.
The profile with its maximal surface height elongation of about 2.7 mm fits the sample, as is shown in Fig. 10 (bottom left).
Every simulation was verified with a bent sample, by overlaying its profile with the simulation data. Figure 10 shows two samples, overlaid with their respective simulations. The bending of the polypropylene foil [Fig. 10(a)] is clearly visible. However, the polyimide foil [Fig. 10(c)] also fits into its simulated shape [Fig. 10(d)] and the maximal height elongations concur.
The images of the samples were taken after they had been exposed to the respective pressure for 24 h, which induced the permanent bending.
After verifying the correctness of the simulations, we could translate the applied pressure to maximal bending heights and, more importantly, to surface elongations by calculating the line integral of each profile with the limits of 2 mm and 26 mm, respectively.
As a result, Table II shows the surface elongation for polyimide and propylene foils for different pressures, ranging from none (0) up to one-sided applied 500 mbar for polypropylene and 200 mbar for polyimide. The profile length L_{s}^{ii} in resting position was 24 mm (as the diameter of the pressure holes was 24 mm).
These data give a direct translation of the surface elongation in % of our polyimide samples because of the applied pressure in the chamber. Therefore, we are now able to bend the samples precisely and reproducible.
E. Transition from hydrostatic to hydrodynamic pressure
The demonstrated setup can also be used to rupture samples. One example can be seen in Fig. 11 where pressure built up and a flexible sample cracked and tore apart, not letting a hydrostatic pressure being established. Instead, the established hydrodynamic flow can be seen by analyzing the different pressures on various points in the setup. One can observe both pressure sensors, one applied in each chamber, showing the same value after 12.000 ms, where the breach occurred. The Fluigent base system was programmed to induce an initial pressure load of 20 mbar on both channels and add 500 mbar to channel 1 every 10.000 ms, while holding channel 2 at base pressure. As such, after 10.000 ms, the pressure was building up to the end-value of 520 mbars in chamber 1, which is clearly visible; however, the end value is never reached due to the sample rupture. The exact moment when the sample broke can be observed by analyzing the pressure difference in both chambers with the Keller pressure sensors. The setup is therefore not only capable of inducing pressure based load on flexible samples and bending them reproducibly and automatically with various strengths, but also capable of detecting small leakages by analyzing the pressure in the chamber system with the ones the fluidic base system should apply.
IV. CONCLUSION
The demonstrated setup allows bending of flexible samples in a very controlled and reproducible way, without direct mechanical contact. Therefore, the mechanical load is not directly induced but transferred via a liquid, which can also be used to simulate body conditions and is future oriented for future electrical and water vapor measurements. This type of measurement is of specific importance if an electrically active implant shall be exposed to a physiological environment while simultaneously mimicking mechanical stress.
The simulation data, with their verification given, enable adjustment of the desired surface bending by employing different pressure values in a very precise manner. With the relationship between surface elongation of the given samples and applied pressure known beforehand, the bending of the samples can be precisely controlled.
This setup was specifically designed to induce micro-motions to flexible substrates, which are not feasible with mechanical setups, however, easily achievable with hydrostatic pressure applied to the sample. Also, the reproducible bending and computer regulation make this setup suitable for fully autonomous long time bending measurements.
Future measurements, including electrical leakage measurements, are also possible, as the flexible samples remain in a fluid with several contact possibilities, both inside of the fluid and outside on the sample itself. By controlled heating of the fluid, also accelerated aging measurements during mechanical bending movements, are possible.
Besides the measurements shown, also purely hydrodynamic measurements are achievable by simply sealing two points with grub screws inside of the pressure corpora, thus resulting in an alternating hydrodynamic flow through all pressure chambers. This flow can be easily distinguished from hydrostatic pressure as was shown in Fig. 11. Thus, also data of other (smaller) test samples in hydrodynamic conditions could be obtained with a simple modification of the chamber system. By controlling the flow direction, natural bending tests would again be possible.
TABLE I. 
Equation parameters of the bend sample profile with a pressure of 200 mbars.
TABLE II. 
Calculated elongation over the samples.
TABLE I. -body
Coefficients	Value	95% confidence bounds
P1	−6.237 × 10^{−10}	(−7.595 × 10^{−10}, −4.879 × 10^{−10})
P2	8.058 × 10^{−8}	(6.533 × 10^{−8}, 9.582 × 10^{−8})
P3	−4.671 × 10^{−6}	(−5.372 × 10^{−6}, −3.97 × 10^{−6})
P4	0.000 151 9	(0.000 134 9, 0.000 168 9)
P5	−0.002 744	(−0.002 978, −0.002 511)
P6	0.023 46	(0.021 66, 0.025 26)
P7	−0.055 86	(−0.063 2, −0.048 52)
P8	0.043 76	(0.030 53, 0.056 98)
P9	−0.004 615	(−0.011 57, 0.002 338)
TABLE II. -body
	Pressure (mbars)	L_{s}^{ii} (mm)	Δl = l_{s} − l_{0} (mm)	ε_{l} = Δl/l_{0} (%)
PP foil	500a	27.0064	3.0064	12.53
	100	24.1308	0.1308	0.55
	50	24.0327	0.0327	0.14
	0 (no pressure)	24.0000	0.0000	0.00
PI foil	200a	24.7411	0.7411	3.09
	100	24.1885	0.1885	0.79
	50	24.0473	0.0473	0.20
	10	24.0019	0.0019	0.01
	0 (no pressure)	24.0000	0.0000	0.00
^{a} Seen in Fig. 10.
FIG. 1. 
Polyimide temperature ramp.
FIG. 2. 
Sketch images of the manufacturing process of the flexible polyimide test device: (a) glass substrate (black) with sacrificial titanium layer on top (gray), (b) sample covered with the first polyimide layer (red), (c) electrode structure created with standard photolithography processes with the photoresist (purple) and the hard mask (gray) sketched, (d) structured resist (purple) with electrode shape, (e) vacuum deposition of a titanium-gold (yellow)-titanium (light gray) layer, (f) final electrode structure after lift-off, (g) top polyimide layer to encapsulate the electrode, (h) final sample.
FIG. 3. 
Flexible polyimide-based biocompatible test sample with gold structures for pressure-based stress test measurements.
FIG. 4. 
Left: sketch of the 2-chamber setup with the flexible substrates in between. Right: image of the pressure corpus.
FIG. 5. 
Sketch of the complete setup.
FIG. 6. 
Hydrostatic pressure is instantly applied over the complete chamber, measured at the inlet (pos. 1) and the end (pos. 2) with a very high data acquisition and a precision higher than required.
FIG. 7. 
Switching the pressure in both chambers, to achieve an alternating bending of the fixated flexible sample due to the resulting pressure difference.
FIG. 8. 
Simulation of hydrostatic pressure of 50 mbars on our test samples, seen in Fig. 2, which extends the surface height by 0.71 mm.
FIG. 9. 
Simulated profile of a polyimide sample with 200 mbars pressure applied; the maximal elongation matches that of the real-world sample in Fig. 10.
FIG. 10. 
Simulated stress measurements overlaid with real samples PP foil (500 mbars) (a), with its simulation (b), polyimide (200 mbars) (c), with its respective simulation (d).
FIG. 11. 
Pressure diagram of a torn flexible sample. The applied hydrostatic pressure ripped the sample and, therefore, a hydrodynamic system is established.
