Time multiplexed deep reactive ion etching of germanium and silicon—A comparison of mechanisms and application to x-ray optics
Although the mechanisms of deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) of silicon have been reported extensively, very little by comparison has been discussed concerning DRIE of germanium. By directly comparing silicon and germanium etching in a time multiplexed DRIE process, the authors extract significant differences in etch mechanisms from a design of experiment and discuss how these differences are relevant to the design and fabrication of silicon and germanium collimating channel array x-ray optics. The differences are illuminated by characteristics such as reactive ion etching (RIE)-lag, aspect ratio dependent etching, and sidewall passivation. Specifically, the authors demonstrate the more severe nature of RIE-lag in germanium, especially at aspect ratios exceeding 13:1. In addition, the differences in the profile evolution between silicon and germanium are shown to be a result of differences in sidewall passivation. There is also a correlation between the different sidewall passivation and the inherent lack of scalloping in the case of germanium DRIE.
I. INTRODUCTION
Given that plasma etching mechanisms of silicon in halogen based gases has been studied extensively in literature, very little has been published in comparison to the mechanisms responsible for plasma etching of germanium despite its technological importance in many areas including electronics, photonics, and x-ray optics [1,2]. For example, SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors require making contact to the buried SiGe or Si layer in Si/SiGe/Si heterostructures, compelling the need for very selective etching [3,4], and hence knowledge of the inherent mechanisms associated with silicon and germanium etching. A few fundamental studies of silicon and germanium etching in CF_{4} (Refs [5] and  [6]) and SF_{6} (Refs [7] and  [8]) based reactive ion etching (RIE) and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) platforms have been conducted, and a recent study has demonstrated deep germanium etching using a modified Bosch process [9]. Although deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) of silicon has been discussed extensively for decades, little has been reported on the mechanisms of germanium DRIE. We believe that there are fundamental differences between silicon and germanium, which are responsible for the observed differences in DRIE using SF_{6} and C_{4}F_{8} based plasmas. These include the lower bond strength of germanium (274 kJ/mol) [10,11] compared to silicon (327 kJ/mol) [10,11] and the higher overall reactivity of germanium with atomic fluorine [4], which in most cases results in a higher etch rate of germanium. Both silicon and germanium react spontaneously with atomic fluorine producing SiF_{4} and GeF_{4} as principal reaction products; however, the higher reactivity and the larger number of dangling bonds of germanium contribute to generally higher etch rates [5]. In addition, the lower thermal conductivity of germanium (60 W/mK) [12,13] compared to silicon (150 W/mK) [12,13] will play a role in the polymerization of the respective materials during the passivation step of the time multiplexed DRIE process. Hence, in this publication, we report on the results of a design of experiment (DOE) which was conducted to compare and determine the mechanisms responsible for silicon and germanium DRIE.
II. EXPERIMENT
Silicon (100) and germanium (111) wafers were prepared with photoresist, silicon dioxide, and aluminum oxide masks for the Bosch etch. The silicon dioxide was deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition, while the aluminum oxide was deposited by atomic layer deposition. The wafers were patterned in the ASML 300C deep ultra violet (DUV) stepper resulting in linewidths ranging from tens of microns down to less than 0.5 μm. The 1.7 μm silicon dioxide layer was then etched in an Oxford PlasmaLab 80 RIE system using CHF_{3}/O_{2}, while the 70 nm Al_{2}O_{3} film was etched in a Plasmatherm 720/740 RIE system using BCl_{3}/Ar. After etching, the photoresist was removed in an AURA 1000 downstream O_{2} plasma system so that the SiO_{2} and Al_{2}O_{3} functioned as hard masks. The photoresist masked wafers were patterned with a 3.5 μm thick GKR DUV resist.
The Bosch etch was performed in a Plasmatherm Versaline DSEIII DRIE system equipped with a 2 MHz ICP generator and a 13.56 MHz generator for the biased electrode. Patterned Ge and Si samples are manually cleaved from full size 100 mm wafers and then mounted to Si handle wafers with blanket silicon dioxide, which have an etched-out window in the center with a size matching the Ge and Si die. This was done to ensure that the exposed Ge and Si in the etch chamber are from the samples and not the Si handle wafer. The samples are bonded to the Si handle wafers with Cool-Grease^{™} (CGR7016), which is thermally conductive. The mechanically clamped DRIE system is also equipped with backside helium cooling along with a water-cooled electrode to maintain the chuck temperature at 23 °C. The gases used for the Bosch process are SF_{6}, C_{4}F_{8}, and Ar.
To determine the respective mechanisms of the silicon and germanium deep etches, a Taguchi L-9 orthogonal partial factorial DOE was executed where the ICP powers of the three steps of the Bosch process, along with the peak-to-peak voltage applied to the wafer electrode were varied. All other etch parameters including the flow rates, pressures, and step times were held constant. The parameters for the standard deep etch process are highlighted in Table I.
Prior to the execution of the DOE, the chamber was cleaned using an oxygen plasma for 10 min followed by a chamber conditioning on a bare silicon wafer using the Bosch etch conditions described above with deposition step power, passivation step power, isotropic silicon etch step power, and peak-to-peak voltage at 2000, 2000, 2500, and 425 V, respectively, for 120 cycles. We ran 27 germanium samples (three for each etch mask) and nine silicon samples (photoresist etch mask only). All samples of the DOE were etched for 240 cycles. Postetch profiles were then cross-sectioned by hand cleaving with a diamond tip scribe for analysis in a Zeiss Ultra scanning electron microscope.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. DOE results and trends
The execution of a DOE is very helpful in extracting the mechanisms of an etch process. In our specific DOE, we measured etch rates of Ge and Si as a function of the ICP powers of each of the steps in the Bosch process. This includes the polymer deposition step (Dep.), polymer removal step (etch A), and the isotropic silicon etch step (etch B). In addition, we varied the peak-to-peak voltage (Vp-p) in the polymer removal step (etch A). The etch rate responses observed are for trench widths of 40 and 4 μm.
The variation of Ge and Si etch rates for the 40 and 4 μm features with respect to the source ICP power within the polymer deposition step are illustrated in Fig. 1.
The increasing source power in the polymer step increases the dissociation of C_{4}F_{8} into major fragments of CF_{2} and CF [14]. The Ge etch rate shows that it is affected more by the increasing polymerization for both feature sizes. This indicates that the in-diffusion of atomic fluorine is more constrained in the case of Ge. The trends for the smaller 4 μm feature are very similar, however, the decrease in Ge etch rate is greater due to apparent RIE-lag.
Also, there is a greater impact of RIE-lag for Ge with about a 46% decrease in the etch rate compared to 29% for Si. The variation of the source power in the polymer removal step (etch A) and its effect on the etch rates of Ge and Si for the 40 and 4 μm feature sizes, respectively, is shown in Fig. 2. The decreasing Si etch rate with ICP power indicates a more robust polymer boundary on its surface and one that is not influenced by the increased fluorine radicals. Figure 2 also illlustrates the respective Ge and Si RIE-lag for the variation in etch A source power that shows a greater impact on the Ge etch rates. RIE-lag which is a manifestation of the relative etch rates among features of different sizes is largely due to greater restriction of the diffusion of neutral or radical transport within narrower features.
Germanium's greater RIE-lag is indicative of its chemical dependence on atomic [F], while silicon seems to be less impacted by RIE-lag suggesting an ion-enhancement component which is significant. Figure 3 displays the Ge and Si etch rate response as a function of isotropic silicon etch (etch B) source power for the 40 and 4 μm feature size, respectively. The isotropic silicon etch step is dependent on the dissociation of SF_{6} and increasing ICP source power results in increasing amounts of atomic [F] and the generation of volatile SiF_{4} and GeF_{4} species. The Ge and Si responses are again quite different in that Ge responds much more favorably to increases in atomic fluorine and the increasing chemical nature of the plasma. The increasing ICP power results in a corresponding decrease in overall DC bias due to the increased plasma density, which may be responsible for the silicon etch rate behavior. Figure 3 illustrates the respective Ge and Si RIE-lag as a function of Etch B source power for the larger and smaller features.
The 46% decrease in Ge etch rate is again indicative of the highly chemical dependence of Ge etching in fluorine based chemistry and its response to decreased transport of chemical species at higher apect ratios. Figure 4 plots the etch rate responses as a function of peak-to-peak voltage within the polymer removal step of etch A. The ion energies within this step are primarily responsible for etching the polymer at the base of the feature or trench. The larger response of the Ge etch rate is again indicative of a thinner fluorocarbon layer. Increasing the ion energy results in greater penetration of reactive ions and the resulting substrate bond breakage makes the more reactive Ge surface more receptive to chemical attack. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) also shows the Ge and Si RIE-lags for the variation in Vp-p.
Silicon's lesser etch rate response for decreased feature sizes as a function of ion energy would indicate its greater reliance on ion enhancement to the etch rate and is attributed to the fact that ion transport is less affected by constricted feature size. The most obvious observation thus far is the consistently higher Ge etch rate for the 40 μm feature size. Germanium's advantage in the etch rate is quickly erased as the feature size is reduced by an order of magnitude. It is best explained by the impact of RIE-lag and how the largely chemical nature of Ge etching is impacted by the reduction in the transport of chemical radicals down the constricted trench width. We found that the etch rates were largely independent of the masking material; however, mask undercut was evident for the Al_{2}O_{3} and SiO_{2} masks as shown in Figs. 8 and 10. In addition, we determined that for aspect ratios less than 13:1, Ge etch rates exceeded those of silicon, while for higher aspect ratios the Ge etch rate fell below that of Si. This is illustrated in the following series of SEM micrographs. Figure 5 shows 40 and 4 μm feature profiles in silicon and germanium for aspect ratios lower and higher than 13:1.
In addition to the differing etch rates of Si and Ge, a noticeable difference is the shape of the resulting etch profiles. The Si etch profile shows a very distinct tapered profile with an angle of 92°, especially for higher aspect ratios, while the Ge etch profile instead displays a nontapered anisotropic profile with an angle of 89.7°as shown in Fig. 6.
Notice that for this 6.7 μm trench size and aspect ratio less than 13:1, the Ge etch rate exceeds that of Si. Figure 7 illustrates aspect ratios greater than 13:1 for a 5 μm wide feature where the Ge etch rate starts to fall behind the Si etch rate.
Additional examples of high aspect ratio (16–25:1) Ge etched structures having straight nontapered profiles with photoresist and silicon dioxide masks are shown in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), respectively.
Tapered profiles are typically the result of the build-up of polymer on the sidewall as the etch proceeds with time. This therefore suggests that there is enhanced polymerization of the silicon sidewall with depth as opposed to the Ge profile which displays no enhancement with depth. Another very interesting contrast between the etched Ge and Si profiles is the more noticeable scalloping on the sidewalls of the Si profiles. This is apparent in Fig. 9, where despite the very short cycle times of 1.5 s, the scalloping of Si is discernable.
Scalloping of the etched Ge profiles is much less evident, and the morphology of the sidewall appears to be much more uniform as shown in Fig. 10.
We suspect that the smoother sidewalls of the Ge are due to thinner polymer formation as a result of the lower thermal conductivity of Ge in comparison to that of Si. Furthermore, the thinner polymer is more susceptible to attack by the in-diffusion of atomic fluorine radicals, which can serve as a smoothing mechanism.
B. XPS results of sidewall passivation
Because chemical analysis of sidewall polymer can be difficult due to the delicate nature of high aspect ratio DRIE features, we employed a small gap structure [15] to simulate a trench that has been etched by DRIE. Structures were constructed with Ge and Si wafers, respectively, along with 500 μm thick spacers of the same material supporting a roof/shadow wafer piece as shown in Fig. 11.
Since the base wafer extends beyond the shadowing piece, exposure in this region is by ions and neutrals that interact to form a fluorocarbon layer. This exposed region is representative of the trench bottoms within DRIE. The transition region near the boundary of the shadowing piece has largely exposure to neutrals and some off-axis ions in the formation of polymer and would be representative of the top trench regions of DRIE structures. The fully shadowed region under the roof piece sees only neutrals in the polymer deposition process and is characteristic of the midtrench regions of a deep etched structure. One gap structure of silicon and one gap structure of germanium were each exposed to identical standard Bosch etch conditions for 240 cycles. The gap structures were stored in a nitrogen purged dry box within the clean room for 10 days until transported to an external lab in a sealed container for x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis.
Chemical analysis of the polymer present in each of the three regions was performed by XPS using a Surface Science Instruments SSX-100 with operating pressure of 2 × 10^{−9 }Torr. Monochromatic Al Kα x-rays (1486.6 eV) with 1 mm diameter beam size was used. Photoelectrons were collected at a 55° emission angle. A hemispherical analyzer determined the electron kinetic energy, using a pass energy of 150 V for wide survey scans, and 50 V for high resolution scans. Deconvolution of the high resolution scans of the C1s peak reveal CF_{2}, CF, and CF_{3} peaks, which are the dominant molecular fragments from the dissosciation of the C_{4}F_{8} polymer precursor [14]. The C1s high resolution scans from the completely shadowed region of the gap structure from Si and Ge are shown in Fig. 12(a) and 12(b), respectively.
The polymer in the completely shadowed region is representative of that on the midtrench sidewall, and although the composition of the polymer on the Ge and Si surfaces is similar chemically, the intensities of the major CF_{2} and CF peaks are lower on the Ge surface both by 25% compared to the Si surface. High resolution C1s scans from the transition region near the boundaries of the shadow piece are shown in Figs. 13(a) and 13(b), respectively, for the Si and Ge gap structures.
The transition region is an area that has exposure to radicals and some off axis ions and is representative of the top region of the trench. Again compositionally, the polymer on the trench top edge of both Ge and Si is very similar; however, again the intensities of the major peaks are lower on the Ge surface by 14.5% for CF_{2} and 5.9% for CF when compared to the Si surface. These results are supportive of our contention that there is less polymer formation on the Ge surface than on the Si surface under identical processing conditions. The fact that Si has a thermal conductivity twice that of Ge could be a major factor in this regard. The thinner sidewall polymer would make it more susceptible to chemical attack by atomic fluorine and could contribute to smoother Ge sidewall surfaces. Another interesting observation of the Si scans is that the intensity of fluorocarbon peaks increases from the top trench to the midtrench region. This suggests more polymer deposition descending into the trench and is supportive of the tapered etch profile as revealed by the SEM micrographs. In contrast, the major fluorocarbon peak intensities of the top trench and midtrench Ge scans illustrate a constant intensity along the depth of the trench. This is in accord with the Ge SEM micrographs showing a highly anisotropic nontapered etch profile. Scans of the completely exposed areas of the Ge and Si gap structures, which are representative of the trench bottoms, are rather uninteresting and show only the presence of adventitous carbon arising from atmospheric exposure. This is expected since the Bosch process terminates with an etch step (etch B), and the presence of polymer is not expected.
C. Implications for designing CCA optics
The goal of collimating channel array (CCA) x-ray optics development at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source is for 3D high-resolution confocal x-ray fluorescence (CXRF) microscopy. There are several advantages in using a lithographically fabricated optic approach. First, the dimensions of the geometry of the fabricated optic define the probe volume of interest. This feature represents a significant improvement compared to the state of art—polycapillaries that have an energy dependent depth resolution. The energy invariant depth resolution of CCAs makes it possible to image heterogeneous elemental samples without the loss of structural detail from lighter elements. For CCAs, a given resolution (r) is related to the channel width (w), the geometric collimation (δ) and the working distance (f) as given by r = w +δf. Therefore, for a given channel width and working distance constraint, being able to adjust the geometric collimation close to the nominal resolution is desirable. Second, since these optics are etched, optimizing the DRIE process to attain deeper channels increases the solid angle of the fluorescent photons collected and, ultimately, the efficiency of the optic.
Silicon substrates have been used for fabricating CCA optics and more recently germanium. We have previously showed that the more attenuating germanium CCAs effectively suppress background radiation in CXRF and extends the energy range of operation from 1.7 to 20 keV^{2}, for which silicon CCAs in comparison begin to fail beyond 10 keV. The design of the CCA channels that radially span from a common focal position are defined by pillars as shown in Fig. 14(c). Notice that due to this design, the critical dimensions for the pillars at the entrance of the optic are smaller compared to the exit. As a result, there is an inherent varying RIE-lag effect imposed on the optic which spans from the entrance where the pillars are close-packed (∼8 μm wide pillars, 2 μm spacing) to the exit where they are more sparsely arranged (∼40 μm wide pillars, 40 μm spacing). For CCAs, RIE-lag is desirable unlike in most MEMS applications where there is considerable effort to minimize this effect. The etch depth is preferred to be shallower at the entrance and very deep at the exit. The advantage of slower etch rates at the entrance helps the pillars maintain their delicate structure while simultaneously being able to etch deeply as possible at the exit. From the DOE, the observed combination of severe RIE-lag with the reduced etch rate of the smaller 4 μm features and higher etch rate of the 40 μm features in germanium presents a desirable characteristic for the etch process for CCA optic design and fabrication where the preference to germanium compared to silicon becomes more obvious.
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we have described a method of comparing and evaluating the time multiplexed deep reactive ion etch mechanisms of silicon and germanium and how the observed differences are relevant to the design and fabrication of collimating channel array x-ray optics. By employing a Taguchi L-9 orthogonal partial factorial DOE, the trends for the etch rates were analyzed for variations in the ICP power for the three processing steps in DRIE and peak-to-peak voltage. The results showed that the fluorine chemical dependence of the germanium etch rate favors higher etch rates in large trench features compared to silicon and more limited etch rates in smaller trenches compared to silicon. The silicon etch mechanism is less chemically dependent and therefore is less susceptible to RIE-lag. We have shown that there is more polymer deposited on the silicon sidewall, which leads to a tapered profile with depth, unlike the germanium profile that maintains a nontapered highly anisotropic sidewall. The reduced polymer on the germanium sidewall could contribute to the enhanced RIE-lag and its relatively smoother sidewall by having a higher sticking coefficient and a higher susceptibility to attack by atomic fluorine. In the fabrication of CCA optics, the combination of higher achievable aspect ratio and the enhanced RIE-lag of the Ge DRIE process is a very desirable characteristic of CCA optic design and fabrication.
Table I. 
Summary of etch parameters held constant on the Plasmatherm Versaline DSEIII DRIE system used for the DOE. The ICP power of the passivation deposition and passivation etch steps was varied between 1500 and 2000 W. The ICP power of the isotropic silicon etch was varied between 2000 and 2500 W. The peak-to-peak voltage of the passivation etch step was varied between 375 and 425 V.
Table I. -body
Processing step	Feed gas	Gas flowrate (sccm)	Pressure (mTorr)	Step time (s)
Passivation deposition	C_{4}F_{8}	150	25	2.0
Ar	30	25	2.0
Passivation etch	SF_{6}	250	40	1.5
Ar	30	40	1.5
Isotropic Si etch	SF_{6}	250	60	1.5
Ar	30	60	1.5
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) Ge (a) and Si (b) etch rates showing RIE-lag for the 40 and 4 μm features as a function of deposition power.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Ge (a) and Si (b) RIE-lag for the 40 and 4 μm features as a function of etch A ICP power.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) Ge and Si RIE-lag as a function of etch B ICP power for the 40 μm (a) and 4 μm (b) features.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) Ge and Si RIE-lag as a function of etch A Vp-p for the 40 μm (a) and 4 μm (b) features.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) SEM profile of etched 40 and 4 μm features in (a) Si and (b) Ge.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) SEM of etched 6.7 μm features in Si at 3.7 μm/min (a) and Ge at 4.2 μm/min (b).
Fig. 7. 
(Color online) SEM of high aspect ratio (>13:1) etched features in Si at 3.7 μm/min (a) and Ge at 3.4 μm/min (b).
Fig. 8. 
(Color online) SEM of etched high aspect ratio features (16–25:1) in Ge using photoresist mask (a) and a silicon dioxide mask (b).
Fig. 9. 
(Color online) SEM profile showing the scalloping of an etched feature in silicon.
Fig. 10. 
(Color online) SEM profile of etched Ge features using resist mask (a) and silicon oxide mask (b).
Fig. 11. 
(Color online) Gap structure used to simulate an etched trench profile showing a 3D rendering (a) and a cross-sectional schematic (b).
Fig. 12. 
(Color online) High resolution C1s XPS scan of shadowed midtrench region of Si (a) and Ge (b).
Fig. 13. 
(Color online) High resolution C1s XPS scan of Si (a) and Ge (b) trench top.
Fig. 14. 
(Color online) Transmission measurements through a straight 7 mm Ge channel from a rotational scan for channel widths of 2 μm (a) and 20 μm (b) showing the collimation of the transmitted beam. (c) SEM image of a fabricated CCA optic.
