Improving SIMS imaging of FIB bevel cuts with an elaborate sample holder
The limited lateral resolution in classical secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) imaging and challenging depth calibration in depth profiling of composite materials restrain the application range for thin film and interface analysis. A motorized sample holder for accurate focused ion beam bevel cuts is designed to artificially increase the interface region. The sample holder is specifically designed for a TOF.SIMS 5 spectrometer by IONTOF, but the basic principle can easily be transferred to other systems. The application of the sample holder is demonstrated with a thin layer model system. A virtual improvement of the lateral resolution by a factor of ten is achieved.
I. INTRODUCTION
Miniaturization is still becoming increasingly important in materials research, e.g., in the area of energy applications. Layered systems are one option to reduce sample sizes/dimensions by maintaining favored functionalities. During preparation or operation of such low dimensional systems, the formation and stability of interfacial layers are of particular interest. The length scales of these layers can vary between a few nanometers and several hundred micrometers. Therefore, classical secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) depth profiling or imaging might be challenging.
SIMS depth profiling is frequently applied to study layered systems and interfacial regions. Herein, the primary ion source is typically operated in the spectrometry (high current bunched) mode offering high currents of secondary ions (SIs), which is also the case in the present time of flight (ToF)-SIMS study. However, classical depth profiles are difficult to interpret for multilayer systems since accurate sputter rates can hardly be determined and correct depth calibrations are complicated. Moreover, pronounced interfacial roughness may lead to smearing effects of thin layers. Depth profiling also fails for porous materials and heterogeneous multicomponent systems with, e.g., matrix embedded small particles. Therefore, new machines combining scanning probe microscopy or focused ion beam (FIB) bevel cuts and SIMS are appropriate solutions [1,2].
The direct preparation of cross-sections for SIMS imaging by cutting and polishing is complex due to surficial smearing effects and layer cracking. The generation of focused ion beam craters and subsequent SIMS crater wall imaging are interesting tools to avoid these experimental failures instead [3]. Classical imaging of FIB cross-sections is limited since the lateral resolution is comparatively poor. Hence, separate (thin) layers can hardly be distinguished.
In the present ToF-SIMS study, the primary ion source is mainly used in the so-called burst alignment mode with a lateral resolution of about 300 nm. Using electrostatic lenses, a narrow beam diameter at a limited mass resolution (m/Δm ≈ 500) and primary ion currents lower than 0.5 pA can be achieved. By the FIB bevel cuts, the observable length scale can be drastically increased up to approximately a factor of ten using the given instrumental system. Direct imaging of interfacial regions is feasible, in this way. See Fig. 1 for a comparative illustration.
The workflow and usage of wedge craters for surface analysis are not innovative and earlier discussed in the literature [4–11]. The bevel cuts are prepared by the variation of sputter ion dose [4,5,7,9], by mechanical cutting [8], by chemical etching [6], or by applying sloped planes on sample holders [10–12]. All methods are suitable for specific samples but suffer from a lack of simplicity or limited applicability. Varying sputter rates, material smearing due to mechanical crater preparation, or appropriate etching solutions need to be considered for optimal results. The discussed experimental solution of direct bevel cut formation via FIB and subsequent SIMS imaging can widen the field of application for surface or subsurface analysis.
The main focus of the present study is the motorized sample holder and its specific experimental workflow within the used ToF-SIMS machine.
II. EXPERIMENT
A. Standard sample
A multilayer system (see Fig. 2) was prepared via thermal evaporation (Tectra GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany, Coater) to demonstrate the limits of standard analysis. The thicknesses were controlled with a quartz crystal microbalance. The pressure within the deposition chamber was lower than 10^{−1} mbar and the substrate temperature was lower than 50 °C due to radiant heating and the bombardment of high energy particles. Thermal evaporation is intentionally applied to receive rarely defined and smeared interfaces, which could be a main application for the designed sample holder.
B. Instrumental parameters
The SIMS measurements were performed with an IONTOF spectrometer (TOF.SIMS 5) using Bi^{+} at 25 keV as primary ion species for quasistatic surface analysis, O_{2}^{+} at 1 keV as sputter ion species for depth profiling, and Ga^{+} at 30 keV as sputter ion for FIB crater formation. All ion sources are in an angle of 45° to the sample surface. The sputter source is arranged at 180°, whereas the FIB column at 90° is with respect to the Bi^{+} primary ion source.
The analysis field for depth profiling was 50 × 50 µm^{2} with a sputter field of 400 × 400 µm^{2}. The chosen O_{2}^{+} setting is not optimized for depth resolution but should give a reasonable reference value to rate the capability of the designed sample holder. The depth calibration is done by ex situ measuring the overall crater depth using a Sensofar-Tech confocal laser microscope (PLu neox 3D optical profiler).
The FIB craters were prepared by using a 100 µm aperture for the Ga^{+} source. Within the sample plane, the individual pixel size was approximately 50 × 50 nm^{2}. The dwell time was separately chosen to achieve bevel cuts reaching the silicon substrate within one pass.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken using a Zeiss MERLIN instrument. A high tension of 5 kV, a probe current of 165 pA, and a working distance of 2.4 mm were applied.
III. SAMPLE HOLDER
A. Workflow—FIB bevel cuts
The observable depth scale for SIMS imaging can be increased by FIB bevel cuts. After thin film preparation, the sample is tilted by an angle α for crater formation. For highest secondary ion count rates and reasonably adjusting the raster size for SIMS imaging, the sample is tilted to the opposite direction subsequently (see the workflow in Fig. 3). Thereby, an x-fold artificial enlargement according to Eq. (1) is obtained (e.g., 1:10 → α = 84.3°),
The position of 0° tilt is crucial for accurate sample positioning and may depend on the specific sample surface condition. Therefore, the calibration is done using the total secondary ion image from a sample position within the tilting axis. By plotting the gradient of secondary ion intensity in the tilting direction against the apparent tilting angle, the 0° tilt position can easily be determined as illustrated in Fig. 4. Based on this, the desired tilting angle with respect to the sample surface can be set. An accuracy of approximately 0.1° for the 0° tilt position is achieved depending on the respective sample surface condition, the sample surface homogeneity, and the number of independent calibration measurements per tilt angle step.
B. Technical description of the sample holder
In a first approach, machined aluminum bricks were used to achieve reproducible sample positioning. The individual bricks need to be inserted into a typical backmount sample holder. After crater formation, the sample has to be transferred out of the vacuum system and prepared on the suitable opposite brick (e.g., 84.3° → 5.7°). Consequently, experiments with the static sample holder are rather time-consuming and less suitable for air-sensitive samples. Experimental results can be found in an earlier study [12].
Primarily, the moveable sample holder consists of an electric motor and several deflections to get the movement at the right spot and the right direction. A potentiometer is used to calibrate the tilt angle and to reproducibly/accurately reach the desired position. The adjustment accuracy is about 0.1° over a maximum range of 158.4°. The whole system is supported by a total of 14 ball bearings. A technical drawing is given in Fig. 5.
The power supply of the electric motor is achieved via two electronical contacts and of the potentiometer via three electronical contacts (one for setting the ground potential). The electrical regulation is done outside the ultrahigh vacuum chamber.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Within the first part of this section, the state-of-the-art analysis (depth profiling, crater wall imaging) of the standard sample is presented and discussed. Thereby, their inherent limitations can directly be revealed, which have led to the development of the new sample holder.
Figure 6 shows the depth profile of the aforementioned standard sample. The blurred interfacial regions indicate a rather rough sample surface, different sputter rates of the present components, and inhomogeneously smeared interfaces although the three-dimensional reconstruction of secondary ion distribution within the crater shows no pronounced artifacts (see the inset in Fig. 6). Furthermore, the different sputter rates seem to lead to an overestimation of the copper layer thicknesses and, accordingly, an underestimation of the indium layer thicknesses, which is in accordance with the expected sputter yields following the empirical equation proposed by Yamamura and Tawara [13]. Thereby, the sputter yield of indium can be approximated as almost twice the sputter yield of copper.
ToF-SIMS imaging of a FIB crater is a good option to study wide interfaces without layer cracking or smearing effects due to mechanical cross-section preparation. Unfortunately, the lateral resolution limits the applicability range. As shown in Fig. 7, a direct identification of separate layers is not possible, with much less investigation of interfaces. What is more, the uppermost indium layer vanished because of the surface exposure to the FIB source as well as the primary ion source, leading to pronounced material ablation.
The experimental workflow for FIB bevel cuts and subsequent ToF-SIMS imaging of the crater wall is performed with the movable sample holder as described in a previous paragraph. The accurate tilting angle is verified by ex situ determination of the crater shape via confocal laser microscopy. This step may be skipped as soon as the tilting angle adjustment comes to a higher level of technical accuracy, e.g., by automation of the calibration step.
An overlay of secondary ion images of the main components within the standard sample is shown in Fig. 8. The separate layers are clearly visible. The thermal mobility of indium leads to a pronounced interdiffusion at the interfaces. Therefore, no sharp layer definitions are present in accordance with the depth profile interpretation (see Fig. 6). The results reveal many structural details of the thin film system, which have not been detectable with the state-of-the-art analyses.
To demonstrate the crater wall appearance, Fig. 9 shows an overlay of secondary electron (SE) and secondary ion image next to higher resolution SEM images of the multilayer area. The well-known curtain effect for FIB crater formation is present in both cases and can hardly be avoided—especially in the case of rough sample surfaces. The lower the incidence angle during FIB crater formation, the more pronounced the curtain effect. This detrimental effect can be minimized by additional smooth surface layers, which can be deposited prior to FIB-ToF-SIMS analysis [14–16]. Nevertheless, the higher resolution SEM images show greatly separated layers without elemental smearing due to the FIB impact. Therefore, the waviness of the resultant SI images can confidently be ignored for interpretation of the images. Figure S1 of the supplementary material [17] shows the straight interface between a smooth aluminum oxide layer and a silicon substrate to prove the influence of the curtain effect. The best lateral resolution of the used burst alignment mode is about 300 nm. Interdiffusion at the interface decreased the achieved lateral resolution to 1 µm and with respect to the bevel cut to 100 nm (virtual lateral resolution). Of course, this is not the best lateral resolution, which can be obtained with modern SIMS machines. SIMS suppliers like Cameca, PHI, and IONTOF actually sell machines achieving lateral resolutions of 50 nm in the imaging mode. Using newer sources that are currently being developed, resolutions down to 20 nm are possible [18].
V. CONCLUSIONS
We describe a prototype sample holder, which is capable of tilting a sample within a ToF-SIMS instrument for the preparation of FIB bevel cuts and subsequent crater analysis. Thereby, an artificial enlargement of layer thicknesses can be achieved and the lateral resolution of ToF-SIMS imaging is virtually improved. The experimental results demonstrate the technical potential of the sample holder. Complex thin film systems can be directly analyzed without external cross-section preparation avoiding interfacial smearing effects. However, tilt angle adjustment, reproducibility of angle alignment, and reduction of curtain effect still need to be optimized in further stages of development.
Fig. 1. 
(Color online) SE and SI image of a standard sample to illustrate the origin of a typical cross-section and bevel cut analysis. The scale bar of the SE image is calibrated with respect to the sample surface. The scale bar of the SI image refers to the direction of layer growth.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) Intended multilayer composition of the standard sample.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) Experimental workflow for preparation of FIB bevel cuts and subsequent SIMS analysis. Within the instrument, the primary ion source is directed onto the sample from the left and the FIB source is located above the figure plane.
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) Total secondary ion intensity gradient against tilting angle. The insets show exemplary ToF-SIMS images within the respective tilting angle range—the brighter the color, the higher the number of secondary ion counts. The images are taken from the sample at a center position on the rocker to reduce parasitic effects. The intensity gradient is evaluated by a line scan in the x-direction, which is identical to the tilting direction. The line is a cubic spline approximation of the experimental data, and its inflection point (dashed line) marks the 0° tilt position.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) Technical drawing of the movable sample holder. 1, sample position; 2, electric motor; 3, potentiometer; 4, gear wheels; 5, worm wheel; 6, deflection cylinders.
Fig. 6. 
(Color online) ToF-SIMS depth profile of the multilayer standard sample. The depth calibration is done via ex situ crater depth measurements. In the upper part, the intended multilayer composition is schematically shown. The inset illustrates a three-dimensional reconstruction of SI distribution within the sputter crater.
Fig. 7. 
(Color online) (a) SE image of the FIB crater (90° crater wall). (b) SI image of the FIB crater. The separate layers cannot be distinguished. The first In layer was already removed by the Bi ion beam during SE imaging.
Fig. 8. 
(Color online) (a) SI image of the FIB bevel cut with an artificial expansion of approximately 1:5. (b) SI image of the FIB bevel cut with an artificial expansion of approximately 1:10. The axis within layer growth is adjusted by the respective enlargement factor (note the deviating scaling in the x-direction but the same scaling in the y-direction). In the upper part, the intended multilayer composition is schematically shown.
Fig. 9. 
(Color online) Overlay of SE (gray) and SI (colored) images of a FIB bevel cut with artificial expansions of (a) 1:5 and (b) 1:10. (c) and (d) show higher resolution SEM images of the multilayer area from the overlays above. In all cases, the length scale is calibrated to the sample surface. The inevitable curtain effect is given by the 45° lines within the crater area.
