An experimental platform for real-time measurement of the deformation of nuclear fuel rod claddings submitted to thermal transients
We report on experimental development and qualification of a system developed to detect and quantify the deformations of the cladding surface of nuclear fuel pellet assemblies submitted to heat transient conditions. The system consists of an optical instrument, based on 2 wavelengths speckle interferometry, associated with an induction furnace and a model pellet assembly used to simulate the radial thermal gradient experienced by fuel pellets in pressurized water reactors. We describe the concept, implementation, and first results obtained with this system. We particularly demonstrate that the optical system is able to provide real time measurements of the cladding surface shape during the heat transients from ambient to high temperatures (up to a cladding surface temperature of 600 °C) with micrometric resolution.
I. INTRODUCTION
In current nuclear reactors, fuel is usually used in the form of pellets UO_{2} or (U, Pu)O_{2}, stacked in a zirconium alloy tube. During irradiation, an interaction between the pellets and the cladding occurs in particular due to thermomechanical phenomena (also called Pellet Cladding Interaction: PCI) [1,2]. However, in some accident conditions of power transients, the fuel may undergo a significant and rapid increment of temperature from its normal situation. This heat causes a transient increase in the stress of the fuel to the cladding and can lead up to rupture [3]. As the first containment barrier to fission products, it is essential to ensure the zirconium alloy tube integrity and thus to better understand these PCI phenomena. It is therefore particularly of interest to carry out analytical experiments that have the ability of simulating the thermal gradient experienced by the nuclear fuel at various “ransitional” power to characterize their behavior, specifically in the high-level activity laboratory. Additionally in order to obtain relevant results, it is critical to have in situ and real time analysis of these behaviors. Such analytical experiments can allow us to develop materials or assemblies that reduce fracture probability of the first containment barrier when some accident conditions of power transients are reached.
In this context, we describe in the present paper a system that has been developed to detect and quantify the deformation induced by PCI on the cladding outer surface during controlled temperature transients. These temperature transients are generated using a system called DURANCE (device simulating the behavior under thermal radial gradient of fuel) that is described in the first part of the paper, as well as its adaptation for in situ optical measurements. In the second part, we will present the optical system that has been designed and implemented, discuss the choices that have been made based on the constraints of the DURANCE system, and describe its operation through examples. At last, some results obtained in operating conditions of the DURANCE system with inert samples will be presented, one of the main results being the ability to obtain mappings of the cladding surface at a surface temperature of up to 600 °C (the pellet being at a temperature of higher that 1700 °C in the core).
II. SYSTEM FOR GENERATION OF THERMAL GRADIENTS IN PELLETS-CLADDING ASSEMBLIES
A. Concept of the system
The main objective of the DURANCE system is to generate a controlled thermal gradient in a nuclear fuel pellet, particularly to reproduce the conditions experienced by the fuel in some accidental situations, at the hot cell laboratory level. In this system, a partial nuclear fuel assembly consisting of 3 pellets in a zirconium alloy tube can be studied. Basically the fuel pellets are drilled in the center, and a metallic filament (Tungsten, W) that can be heated by Joule effect is inserted in the hole. The heated filament will act as the heat source in the core of the pellet, this heat source being controlled by the injected electrical power. The assembly is inserted into a hollow core cylinder made of insulating material. Therefore, the magnitude of the radial temperature gradient between the core sample and the outer face of the cladding is controlled by the core temperature level set by the injected electrical power and the nature, thickness, and the external temperature of the insulator. The latter is set by a heat exchanger with water circulating in a closed-loop cooling system, typically set at 20 °C. In such a configuration, the system is free from water flow (pressurized or not) in contact with the assembly. A schematic of this arrangement can be found in Fig. 1. The device allows us to bring the fuel to a core temperature of up to 2000 °C and stabilize the cladding temperature around 350 °C ± 50 °C.
B. Thermal gradients
In order to validate the base concept described previously, the thermal behavior of the device was modeled under Cast3m [4]. This modeling should allow, as a first step and through a parametric study as simple as possible, us to evaluate the radial gradient within the pellets and to specify the nature and the geometry of the insulators to set the gradient to the required values. The DURANCE device was described [Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)] according to an axisymmetric geometry, initially on a stack of three pellets and then, to simplify the model, on only the central pellet by neglecting the edge effects of the two end pellets (this hypothesis has been validated by a code to code comparison). It has been also considered that there is no heat exchange via the lower and upper faces (adiabatic condition) of the analyzed pellet.
It was first considered that the gas gaps between the different materials are neglected. This perfect contact between the elements implies a single mode of transfer by conduction. In the second step, the gas blades were integrated into the model to determine their influence on the thermal gradient. The cooling circuit is modeled by a temperature imposed at 20 °C corresponding to the temperature of the water circulating in the exchanger [Fig. 1(c)]. The main results obtained show that, depending on the nature of samples, it is possible to find an insulation system to achieve the required temperature profile, whatever the thermal load. We precise that this geometry of samples respects standard geometry of the fuel and its cladding. Alumina and zirconia were selected as materials bracketing thermal properties of UO_{2} which is the material of main interest in these developments. These materials also allow us to realize tests easier, and they were used in this work. We used classical material properties libraries such as for their thermal properties [5–7]. For example (Fig. 3), for alumina used as fuel, modeling shows that to obtain a temperature of 600 °C at the outer wall of the cladding, the insulator to be used is alumina with a thickness between 4 and 5 mm. The gas gaps have obviously an impact on the model essentially due on the low thermal conductivity of Ar. The parametric study was led to reveal the relative influence of each geometrical characteristic and has shown the major influence of the gap between the cladding and insulator. This led us to require accurate geometrical specification for the insulator manufacturing.
C. Experimental configuration
According to these concepts, the DURANCE design has been launched yielding to the experimental device and platform detailed, respectively, in Figs. 4 and 5. From a general point of view, the principle of DURANCE is close to that of MERARG [8] (also develop in the LAMIR laboratory, Laboratoire d’Analyse de la Migration des Radioelements), which uses HF-induction heating. From the beginning of the project, the idea was to be able to switch easily from one equipment to the other in the hot cell, which imposed the heating concept. However, the use of induction heating must be adapted to the DURANCE furnace: using the W mandrel at the center of the pellets as a susceptor with respect to induction is not possible since the zirconium alloy cladding (metallic element), located between the center of the pellets and the coil (Fig. 3), would undergo the coupling. The cladding would therefore be heated in the same way as the crucible in MERARG. In order to be able to use the electromagnetic field created by the induction coil to heat the resistive system of DURANCE, the solution chosen was a based on an electrical transformer. The electromagnetic field is captured by an intermediate coil and creates an induced current which circulates into the mandrel. This coil must be placed inside the quartz tube. The metallic mandrel of tungsten is therefore placed in the center of the pellet drilled for this purpose.
D. Adaptation to optical measurements of the cladding
The first requirement to implement an optical monitoring of the cladding surface in the system described previously is to have a cooling system and particularly an insulating material transparent to the wavelength of interest. The material should also have the ability to be manufactured as a hollow core cylinder with polished inner and outer surfaces. Given these constraints and required thermal properties obtained by parametric studies with CAST3M, Al_{2}O_{3} material was chosen (transparency range in the visible of up to 4 μm). This material has indeed a high thermal conductivity of approximately 30 W m^{−1} K^{−1} compared to other possible materials such as various glasses (1-2 W m^{−1} K^{−1}). Simulations of the expected thermal gradients generated with the assembly and Al_{2}O_{3} insulating materials are given in Fig. 3. In the typical operating conditions of the platform, the cladding surface can reach a temperature of 600 °C and has to be observed through a thermal gradient from 600 °C to 20 °C in the Al_{2}O_{3} insulator.
The second requirement is to open a window in the heat exchanger in order to be able to observe the area of interest on the cladding, without being detrimental for the cooling of the system. Based on the hypothesis that the cladding deformation presents radial symmetry, only a profile along the tube axis is of interest. Therefore, a window of 10 mm height and 5 mm large has been opened in the heat exchanger. Numerical simulations were conducted in order to ensure that this opening has negligible contribution to the expected heat gradient. The distance between the induction coils has also been adapted to allow optical sight. Additionally the measurement has to be done through the tube quartz, which has optical quality surfaces and has a transparency range in the visible and near infrared.
With the described adaptations of the system, the cladding surface can be directly observed during operation and distant optical measurements can be considered, whereas without these modifications, we can only perform measurements before and after the test.
E. Thermal qualification
The last phase of the DURANCE general development process consisted in to determine the platform performance in term of thermal behavior, i.e., capabilities to reproduce dedicated thermal gradients. The parameters checked during this qualification phase were the insulator nature, its thickness, and space between materials. Temperatures were measured using two thermocouples of type C (defined as TC in Fig. 4). The first thermocouple, referred to as the “TC fuel core” in Fig. 4, was inserted into the center of the upper pellet, along the Tungsten filament through a hole drilled in the pellet. The second one, referred to as the “TC cladding” in Fig. 4, was positioned at the external surface of the cladding, through a hole drilled in the insulator. According to the needs, each thermocouple allows during the heating the regulation or the measurements of the temperature to the thermal gradient. Examples of the DURANCE thermal behavior as a function of the Al_{2}O_{3} insulator thickness are given in Fig. 6. All these experiments have been performed with Al_{2}O_{3} samples as fuel pellets. In the same way, experiments have been carried out to evaluate the influence of the sample nature (Al_{2}O_{3}, ZrO_{2}) on the gradient magnitude.
III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE TWO WAVELENGTHS INTERFEROMETER
The deformations that can occur on the cladding during a power transient, i.e., local changes of the tube diameter, have been observed to be in the range of a few tens of micrometers [9]. Different optical techniques can be considered to detect and quantify such changes on the surface during the power ramps, e.g., structured-light 3D imaging [10], scanning imaging techniques such as confocal microscopy [11], or interferometric techniques such as speckle interferometry or optical coherence tomography [11]. However, if we take into account, on one hand, the different constraints of the system such as the working distance (measurement to be done at more than 20 cm away from the sample), the required field of view (height of approximately one pellet, i.e., 1 cm, and a width of 1 mm), the properties of the cladding surface (roughness, reflection/scattering), and on the other hand the expected performances such as surface height precision, measurement dynamic, spatial resolution, speckle interferometry was the best candidate for our application [12–15].
We have previously reported on an optical setup dedicated to on-line fuel rod cladding deformation measurements [16]. This system was based on the speckle interferometry technique at a single wavelength (633 nm). Therefore, inherently to the technique, the system could be used only for differential measurements: the deformation of the surface of the cladding was obtained from two speckle interferograms taken at different time. Only the surface shape evolution that occurs between the recordings is then possible, under the condition that there is no other displacement of the sample. This system was however not compliant with the environment of the planned experiments. Then in order to improve the robustness against vibration and to obtain a direct measurement of the shape of the surface, a two-wavelength interferometer has been developed.
A. Design of the system
As previously described, the measurement has to be realized through a quartz tube (2.5 mm-thick) containing an argon flow and through an Al_{2}O_{3} thermal insulator (3.5 mm-thick) surrounding the fuel assembly rod. The wavelength of the measurement can therefore be chosen in the visible to near infrared range. In the case of two-wavelength interferometry, a phase map is obtained at a synthetic wavelength Λ, defined by
where λ_{1} and λ_{2} are the 2 wavelengths of the interferometer. The dynamic range and the resolution of the measurement are directly dependent on Λ. In our case, the requirements are a resolution better than 1 μm and a measuring range better than 100 μm. With Λ set to 10 μm, these requirements can be converted as a resolution of Λ/10 and a measuring range of 10Λ, which is typical in an interferometric measurement. Therefore, considering also the available commercial lasers, we have chosen two He-Ne laser wavelengths: λ_{1} = 633 nm and λ_{2} = 594 nm. The corresponding synthetic wavelength in this case is Λ = 9.6 μm.
In order to obtain quantitative phase measurements, a phase-shifting technique method associated with a phase retrieval procedure has to be applied. We have chosen a standard temporal phase shifting method [17] with the use of a mirror mounted on a piezo electric transducer (PZT) in the reference beam of the interferometer (the phase retrieval is described in Sec. III C). Considering the dispersion of thermo-optical coefficients of Al_{2}O_{3} with wavelength (dn/dT(λ)) [18], the first order estimates indicate that the effect of the measurement through heated Al_{2}O_{3} has negligible influence on the phase difference between the two wavelengths, in our measurement conditions.
The field of view in the area of interest is of approximately 1 cm^{2}, and the working distance has to be longer than 20 cm. This working distance is related to the presence of the inductive coils around the sample (Fig. 5). The lens we have chosen for this application is a “Super-Eye” objective from Lightworks.
B. Experimental setup
For practical reasons and for possible future implementation in a hot cell, all equipments that could be placed outside the experimental area were dissociated from the interferometer. The 2 He-Ne laser sources of few mW have been coupled into two single mode fibers. Half waveplate (Thorlabs WPMQ10M-633 and AHWP10M-600) and polarizer (Thorlabs LPVISC100) combinations at the laser outputs are used before injection to control independently the injected power of each laser. A 2:1 wideband fiber combiner (Thorlabs TW630R5A1) is then used to combine the two beams in the third single mode fiber (Thorlabs P3-460B-FC-5) that can be plugged in the optical head. With this configuration, the two beams at the output of the fiber are perfectly collinear in the optical head (neglecting chromatic aberrations).
The optical head is described schematically in Fig. 7. At the output of the single mode fiber, a fiber collimator (Thorlabs F810FC-635) is used to obtain a collimated beam with approximately 5 mm diameter. A polarizer (P_{1}) is used to set a linear polarization in the experiment. Then a 50:50 non-polarizing beam splitter cube (Thorlabs BS016) sends the beam in the two arms of the interferometer. In the first arm, the beam is focused with a cylindrical lens (Thorlabs LJ1629RM-A) in order to illuminate only the area of interest on the sample (vertical thin line of 1 cm height) and manage the specular reflexions on the different cylindrical surfaces that are not anti-reflective coated (the use of a collimated beam results in direct reflexions in the imaging system). It means that the zircalloy tube is illuminated only on a thin generating line of the tube. The surface of the cladding illuminated with the laser is imaged with the objective (Super-Eye Telecentric Lens, SE400c, LightWorks) on the camera sensor (SCOR-20SO, Pointgrey). The angle between illumination and observation is approximately 8.5 °C. In the second arm, the collimated beam is reflected on the reference surface mounted on the PZT (P612 with an E-665 controller, PI-Physik Instrumente). A Polarizer (P_{2}) is inserted into the beam path for beam attenuation. The reference beam path is shown in the schematic Fig. 7. Along this path, different beam splitters have been implemented to avoid direct illumination of the sample with the reference beam that could result in back reflections from the different interfaces that the beam has to go through. At last, a polarizer (P_{3}) is placed at the objective entrance to manage the ratio of intensities between the two beams and optimize the contrast. The magnification of this objective is of 0.4, with a working distance of 200 mm.
C. Phase retrieval
As mentioned earlier, the absolute phase is determined with a temporal phase-shifting technique. A sequential measurement is done with 3 phase-shifts (ΔΦ = 0; 2π/3; 4π/3), and a home-made software with filtering and phase-unwrapping steps is used to obtain in real-time the phase cartography. This software is the same as the one used for one wavelength speckle interferometry, and it is described in Ref [16] and based on filtering and phase unwrapping methods described in Refs [17] and  [19]. From the phase difference between the wavelengths (ϕ), the phase data to physical data (altitude z) conversion is realized from the equivalence z = ϕ * Λ/4π. It means that for a phase evolution of 2π in the phase map, the corresponding displacement in the sample plane is Λ/2. An example of a measurement and results of phase retrieval on a cladding with deformation is given in Fig. 8. In this particular example, the deformation on the cladding was obtained with the “model” sample described in Sec. III D and Fig. 9.
There are several possible causes of errors in the phase measurements that need to be further analyzed. Indeed, the experimental configuration requires observation through 5 mm of sapphire that can experience thermal gradients and mechanical stress (thermomechanical stress and pressure from the zircalloy tube) during the experiments. The refractive indices at the two wavelengths can change differently because of thermo-optical and photo-elastic effects which could have possible effects on the phase maps. The thermo-optical coefficient (dn/dT) of alumina is the range 8–15 × 10^{−6} K^{−1} depending on the source of data and material form (crystal orientation) [18,20]. Taking into account the dispersion of this coefficient with wavelength, as reported, for instance, in Ref [18], a conservative estimate would be a difference of a thermo-optical coefficient of 5 × 10^{−8} K^{−1} between the two wavelengths of interest. Considering propagation in 5 mm of alumina (as in our experiment), with a mean temperature of 500 °C (again conservative estimate because 500 °C is the temperature only on the inner surface in our case), the optical path difference after propagation between the two wavelengths would be 100 nm. About possible photoelastic effect, a first-order approximation of the changes of the refractive index can be expressed as 12n^{3}pϵ with n being the stress-independent refractive index, p being the elastooptic coefficient (0.2 from Ref [20]), and ϵ being the strain related to the stress. Therefore, the difference of the refractive index between the two wavelengths with stress can be estimated to 12(n633nm3−n593nm3)pϵ=2×10^{−3}, taking into account the refractive index dispersion [20]. Evaluation of stresses and strains but considering the Young modulus of sapphire (350 GPa) and yield point (400 MPa), the maximum strain in a regime close to rupture is approximately 10^{−3}, leading to an estimated difference of the refractive index between the two wavelengths of 2 × 10^{−6}. Considering propagation in 5 mm of sapphire, the optical path difference between the two wavelengths in this case is 10 nm. These optical path difference values (10–100 nm) are a fraction of the wavelengths of the lasers and should be taken into account if sub-micronic sensitivity is required. However, they have been estimated with very conservative values and are one to two orders of magnitude compared to the sensitivity of the instrument at the present state of developments: such effects were not empirically observed in the different conducted tests.
D. Qualification of optical measurements
In order to perform qualification tests, a model sample has been designed which is able to produce repeatable and well-controlled deformations of few micrometers on a cladding rod. This model sample is composed of a zirconium alloy tube inside which a piston coupled to a stepper motor pushes a raw-plug [see principle in Fig. 9(a)]. The deformations on the tube can be controlled with the applied load by the piston. In the range of deformation that has been explored (few μm to few tens of μm), the deformation was observed to be reversible. This model sample could be placed in the same situation as the real sample (surrounded by insulating material, heat exchanger, and so on) and placed in the DURANCE system to perform qualification tests. We present in Fig. 9(d) a 3D shape measurements obtained on this model sample, with a profile given at the position of maximum deformation in Fig. 9(b).
The measurements have been compared to a commercial and calibrated system: an optical profilometer (ZYGO New View 7300) working on the principle of optical coherence tomography. Measurements were done with a 10× Mirau objective. The optical configuration was calibrated with a plane silicon carbide reference to correct residual optical aberrations. The axial resolution is below 1 nm from the manufacturer and the lateral resolution, defined by the camera pixel, is 1.1 μm. A 3D-map corresponding to the surface level on the deformed model sample is shown in Fig. 9(c). It corresponds to the same sample and deformation as the one obtained with the 2 wavelengths interferometer shown in the same figure. As shown in the profile comparisons in Fig. 9(b), a very good agreement is obtained between the two measurements on the amplitude and shape of the deformation. We can note that the profiles extracted on the two measurements are not obtained at exactly at the same location which could explain the small differences observed.
These qualifications tests have however been obtained in relaxed conditions compared to the operational conditions of the DURANCE system (no heating of the fuel), and the last step, detailed in Sec. IV, is to perform measurements in real conditions: including heating of fuel and cladding, gas flow, magnetic field, water circulation in the exchanger, thermal gradients in the different materials, surface cladding at high temperature, and all other possible sources of noise.
IV. RESULTS
We describe in this last section the results, i.e., shape measurements of the fuel cladding, in typical conditions of a DURANCE experiment to simulate accident conditions of power transients. The experiments that we described below were obtained on dummy ceramic pellets of ZrO_{2}.
A. Description of the experiment
A picture of the optical head installed on the DURANCE system can be seen in Fig. 10. It is located at approximately 20 cm, and in this configuration it was not observed any significant coupling of the intense magnetic field on the optical system.
Details in the sample area are given in Fig. 11. The height of the window and thus of the observed area is 8 mm. The width of the window is quite large because the beam has to be incident on the cladding with an angle, as shown in Fig. 7, but the effective width of the measurement is 0.5 mm.
B. Optical measurements at different cladding temperatures
A first important result to obtain with the described system is the demonstration of interferometric measurements at high cladding temperatures. From simulations, the cladding temperature can be indeed as high as 600 °C in the targeted experiments. The temperature at the center of the pellet and at the cladding surface is constantly monitored during the experiments with thermocouples, and these measured temperatures are used for the regulation of the system. We give in Fig. 12 an example of a linear ramp of 2 °C/s in the center of the fuel pellet followed by a plateau. The temperature measured on the external surface of the cladding is also reported in this figure.
In Fig. 13 we report the results of an experiment made in the case of an incremental increase of temperature: multiple linear ramps followed by 5 min plateaux. Several interferometric measurements were taken at each plateau to ensure the repeatability of the measurement for each temperature.
First of all, it can be observed in these measurements that the cladding surface exhibits a vertical tilt inclination. In fact, the zircalloy tube was vertical but the optical head was tilted for these experiments for better observation of the correlation fringes during the experiment. These fringes are quite noisy as it can be seen in Fig. 13(a), but the phase retrieval algorithm allows a good reconstruction of the cladding profile as seen in the first image of Fig. 13(b). As the temperature increases, the measurements are affected by more noise, and the phase retrieval becomes more difficult. However, as illustrated in the figure, the surface topography can still be reconstructed by the software, up to almost 500 °C for this experiment. Therefore, any deformation of the surface at such temperature could be detected. Other set of experiments have shown that the measurement could be done up to 700 °C, which is above the requirement for the experiments on real fuel. We can note that the interferometric system is very robust and no alignment correction was necessary during few hours experiments.
C. Observation of transient events at high temperature
Previous results have demonstrated the capability to perform measurements at high cladding temperature. Also of importance for future experiments is the ability to detect events during the heating transients and to correlate them to the experimental conditions. The acquisition time for the 6 images necessary for profile reconstruction (2 wavelengths and 3 phase-shift for each wavelength) is on the order of 1 s because of the sequential acquisition of the phase-shifting technique. Phase retrieval and profile reconstruction take several seconds on a standard laptop computer but could be decreased with a high performance computer and parallel computing. Therefore, in standard conditions, the temporal resolution is of several seconds.
In the different campaigns of experiments that were done for qualification of the system, there was no observation of cladding deformation; indeed, as said experiments were conducted on dummy samples. However, other transient events were observed such as displacements or tilts of the whole assembly, proving the capabilities of the optical system. We report in Fig. 14 such an observation. It can clearly be observed a displacement of the cladding surface during the heating ramp that reaches +10 μm at the maximal temperature of approximately 700 °C and then a tilt of the cladding at the beginning of the cooling sequence. We can note that these displacements or tilts were due mechanical instabilities that have been corrected after being evidenced by the optical measurements.
V. CONCLUSION
An optical system based on two-wavelength speckle interferometry has been developed and coupled to a device simulating the behavior of fuel cladding assembly under the thermal gradient. It was shown that with the proposed configuration the surface topography of the cladding surface could be precisely obtained despite the “non optically friendly” environment. The results obtained with this device have been successfully compared with more standard techniques for validation. At this stage of the developments, a measurement can be done on a surface of 5 mm height by 0.5 mm width, at a cladding surface temperature of more that 600 °C, with a fully automatic measurement every second during an experiment of few hours. Different examples were given in the paper to illustrate the potential of the instrument. However, the system has also to be ultimately deployed into high activity cells since the sample of interest will be irradiated fuel, and this part will be the next stage of our work.
FIG. 1. 
Concept of the system to generate a radial thermal gradient: the tungsten filament generates a heat source at the center of the pellets; the gradient is controlled by the nature and thickness of the insulating material and the boundary temperature set by the cooling system.
FIG. 2. 
DURANCE modelling: (a) initial geometrical model and (b) geometrical model used for the parametric study, (c) finite element model settings.
FIG. 3. 
Temperature profile along the DURANCE radius sample as a function of the thermal load and for different insulators.
FIG. 4. 
DURANCE device.
FIG. 5. 
DURANCE platform.
FIG. 6. 
Comparison of temperature measurements with the thermocouples at the center of the assembly and at the cladding surface for different Al_{2}O_{3} insulator thicknesses and different injected power in the tungsten filament.
FIG. 7. 
Optical system for interferometric measurement of cladding deformation. SMF: Single Mode Fiber; C: fiber Collimator; P_{1}, P_{2}, P_{3}: Polarizers; BS: Beam Splitter; LC: Cylindrical Lens; O: Video Objective; CCD: CCD Camera; Ref: Reference Mirror mounted on the piezo translation stage.
FIG. 8. 
Example of a measurement on a zircalloy cladding with deformation. [(a) and (b)] Speckle interferogram recorded from imaging the cladding surface with the system at 633 nm (a) and 594 nm (b); [(c) and (d)] phase maps obtained at 633 nm (c) and 594 nm (d), from 3 phase-shifted speckle interferograms for each wavelength; (e) phase map at the synthetic wavelength (Λ) resulting from the subtraction of (d) and (c); (f) filtered deformation map with the algorithm described in Ref [16]; (g) unwrapped phase map, converted in physical units with the relation described in the text.
FIG. 9. 
(a) Schematic of the “model” sample to simulate deformations on the cladding; (b) altitude profile measured on the “model” sample with the interferometer described in this paper (red) and comparison to a measurement with a Zygo Newview profilometer in the same area (black); (c) 3D profile obtained with the Zygo profilometer; (d) 3D profile obtained with the 2-wavelength interferometer.
FIG. 10. 
Implementation of the interferometer on the DURANCE platform. In the yellow box, the complete optical head is on the left, and the sample area of the DURANCE system is on the right (the sample is hidden behind the coupling coils). The yellow single mode fiber for transport of the 633 and 594 nm beams can be seen on the extreme left.
FIG. 11. 
Details of the experimental configuration close to the sample area. (a) A view from the interferometer of the sample. Scattering from the laser illumination on the cladding can be seen through the window in the heat exchanger in the center of the yellow circle. (b) A magnified view of the window that has been made in the heat exchanger to observe the cladding through the transparent insulating material. The laser line illumination can be noticed. (c) A view of the cladding with the imaging system of the interferometer and illumination with a white LED integrated in the instrument. (d) The same view as (c) but with laser illumination in the conditions of speckle interferometry.
FIG. 12. 
Measurements of temperature with thermocouples during an experiment (defined linear ramp and plateau) in the core of the pellet and at the surface of the cladding.
FIG. 13. 
Measurement of the cladding surface at different temperatures on the DURANCE system. (a) Correlation fringes obtained by subtraction of the speckles patterns at the two wavelengths (ambient temperature). (b) Surface topographies obtained in the case of different temperatures.
FIG. 14. 
Observation of fuel/cladding assembly displacement and tilt during a heating ramp. (a) Cladding profile along a vertical line measured at different temperatures during the heating ramp and cooling sequence; (b) 3D cladding profile at the beginning of the experiment and (c) at the end of the experiment.
