Effect of ablation geometry on the dynamics, composition, and geometrical shape of thin film plasma
The characteristics of plasma plume produced by front and back ablation of thin films have been investigated using fast imaging and optical emission spectroscopy. Ablation geometry dependence of the plume dynamics, its geometrical aspect and composition is emphasized. Also, the effect of an ambient environment and the beam diameter of an ablating laser on the front and back ablations is briefly discussed. Analysis of time resolved images and plasma parameters indicates that the energetic and spherical plasma formed by front ablation is strikingly different in comparison to the slow and nearly cylindrical plasma plume observed in the case of back ablation. Further shock formation, plume confinement, thermalization and validity of different expansion models in these two ablation geometries are also presented. The present study demonstrates the manipulation of kinetic energy, shape, ion/neutral compositions and directionality of the expanding plume by adjusting the experimental configuration, which is highly relevant to its utilization in various applications e.g., generation of energetic particles, tokamak edge plasma diagnostics, thin film deposition, etc.
I. INTRODUCTION
The interaction of laser light with matter and the properties of an induced plasma have been a key area of interest to the scientific community because of its importance in fundamental as well as in application oriented studies [1–3]. Laser produced plasmas have been studied extensively in the past and still they remain to be a growing area [4–6]. It has many applications in various disciplines such as laser processing of solid materials, laser induced mass spectrometry, elemental analysis, materials science, thin film deposition, ion source generation and plasma diagnostics [1,7–10]. Furthermore, laser induced back ablation (BA), also known as laser blow-off, is a promising mechanism, where a laser beam penetrates through a transparent substrate and heats the film-substrate interface resulting in the expulsion of the target material along the direction of the laser beam [11–13]. Because of the specific nature of back ablation plasma plume, it has potential applications in many key disciplines such as thin film deposition, reflectance study, material processing, microfabrication, thermal to super-thermal neutral atomic beam generation and as a diagnostic tool for tokamak edge plasma parameters [14–17]. Apart from the above, another important mechanism is front ablation (FA) of thin films. In such an experiment, the incident laser heats the thin film deposited on a substrate and produces a very high temperature followed by rapid phase transition from solid to vapour [18,19]. Front ablation of thin films is a less explored technique which can provide several advantages for a wide range of applications such as film removal, energetic particle generation and thin film study (e.g., opacity, reflectance etc.) [20,21].
In view of the above, a comparative study of plasma plume produced by front and back ablation of LiF-C thin film has been carried out under different experimental conditions. In the present experiment, we have chosen the LiF-C thin film because Li has lower mass and ionization potential, and its strong emission lying in the visible region is highly suitable for tokamak edge plasma diagnostics. The effect of laser fluence, spot size and ambient pressure on the plasma plume has been investigated in both the geometries. Several important phenomena, for example, the shape, size, ion/neutral compositions, electron temperature and density of the plasma plume have been presented. This study facilitates the selection of the experimental technique (ablation geometry) for controlling the characteristics and dynamics of an expanding plasma as per requirements.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
The schematic diagram of the experimental set up is shown in Fig. 1. A Nd:YAG laser with a fundamental wavelength of 1064 nm (pulse width ∼8 ns, full-width at half-maximum) is used to produce a plasma plume of thin films in two different geometries i.e., front ablation and back ablation. A multi-component LiF-C thin film (0.5 μm carbon and 0.05 μm LiF) supported on a transparent quartz substrate of 2 mm thickness is used as a target in this experiment.
The target plate with 60 × 60 mm dimensions is placed on a holding arrangement facing the film coated surface and perpendicular to the laser direction. The whole arrangement is placed inside a cylindrical stainless steel chamber. The target holding arrangement is fixed with a motorized base connected to a position micro-controller. A fine needle valve is used to vary the ambient pressure inside the chamber ranging from the vacuum (∼10^{−6} mbar) to 1.33 mbar of argon pressure. The experiment is performed in a single shot mode, where operating parameters of a laser are utilised to set the desired laser fluence on the target surface. An ICCD camera (Intensified charge coupled device, 4 Picos, Stanford Computer Optics, Inc.) having a time resolution of ∼200 ps is used to record the images of the expanding plume. Temporal variation of the plasma plume is obtained by varying the time delay between the trigger pulse and the gate opening time of the ICCD. The gate time of the ICCD is set to 5 ns and 10 ns. In the present experiment, plume images in FA geometry with 5 ns integration time are not clear beyond 400 ns. Therefore, in order to qualitatively compare in a vacuum, plume images in FA and BA configurations beyond 400 ns are recorded with an integration time of 10 ns. For all other cases (except for t > 400 ns in a vacuum), the integration time is fixed at 5 ns. A mesh image of known dimension (5 × 5 mm) is recorded to calibrate the plume images. To measure the plasma plume temperature and density, optical emission spectroscopy is used as a diagnostic tool. A custom-made telescopic arrangement (Andor Collimator, model- ME-OPT-0007) has been used to collect the emission of the plume (up to 3 mm from the target surface) and fed into a 0.5 m spectrometer (Acton Advanced SP2500A, Princeton Instruments) through optical fibres. The output of the spectrometer is coupled with an ICCD. The resolution of the spectrometer is 0.08 nm. The ICCD camera, the spectrometer, and the laser beam are synchronised with a micro-controller based timing generator with the timing jitter less than 1 ns.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Various features of a laser induced plasma plume of a LiF-C thin film produced by two different ablation geometries, that is front ablation (FA) and back ablation (BA) of a thin film, have been presented. The effect of ablation geometry on the dynamics and the geometrical shape of the expanding plasma plume is studied by analysing the two-dimensional images of both the FA and BA plumes as a function of time and estimated plasma parameters. A comparative study between FA and BA plumes in reference to its dependence on the ambient pressure, laser fluence and spot size is presented in the following sections. Figure 2 presents the sequence of images of FA and BA plumes, captured at different time delays, varying from 100 ns to 1000 ns in a vacuum. Each image represents the spectrally integrated emission intensity in the wavelength range 350–750 nm. The energy and the spot size of the laser beam are set to 100 mJ and 1 mm, respectively, which can give the laser fluence of ∼3.18J/cm{2} at the target surface. Efforts have been made to ensure identical experimental conditions for both front and back ablation.
A visual examination of the plume images reveals that in a vacuum, the plasma plume expands linearly, and its emission intensities decrease gradually with time for both ablation geometries. The plume expansion in a vacuum is well modelled as adiabatic expansion, where the thermal energy of plasma species is rapidly converted into the kinetic energy [22,23]. This leads to a decrease in electron temperature and density and hence a decrease in emission intensity with an increase of time delay. However, it is clearly observed that the expansion velocity, the plume emissivity, the plume divergence and the geometrical shape of the FA plume is completely different in comparison to those observed in BA geometry. In the case of FA, the plasma plume expands at a much higher velocity and highly diverge in comparison to the BA plume. The average expansion velocity of the FA plume is 7.6×10^{6} cm/s, as obtained by the linear dependence of axial dimension of plume with time. In this case, the axial velocity of the plume is almost comparable to the lateral velocity component (see Table I), and hence it attains a nearly hemispherical shape. Due to the rapid expansion, the emission intensity decreases quickly and after 1000 ns, it is almost diffused and beyond the detection limit of the ICCD. It is also observed that the plasma plume gets split in FA geometry. Plume splitting in the absence of ambient gas could be explained as follows. The ablated species, mainly the ions, moving with high velocity forms the leading edge of the expanding plasma plume. Collisional excitation of slow moving species (mainly the neutrals) represents the trailing portion of the plasma plume.
The scenario is completely different in the case of BA plume where the expansion velocity and therefore the emissive dimension of the plume is much lower than that observed in FA configuration. The estimated expansion velocity of BA plume is ∼1.36×10^{6} cm/s, which is 1/5th of the observed velocity of the FA plume. The BA plume is more directed in nature where it expands with lower lateral velocity and hence the core of the plume attained nearly cylindrical symmetry up to 400 ns time delay. Also, due to slow expansion and low divergence, the BA plume is confined in small volume, and hence its luminosity is higher and its emission is sustained for a longer time (∼4μs) in comparison to the FA plume.
In order to present the time dependence of expanding plume geometry, the aspect ratio (length/width) of the plume is plotted as a function of time delay for both FA and BA geometries as shown in Fig. 3. The high diverging and spherically symmetric nature of the front ablation plume is clearly illustrated in Fig. 3, where the aspect ratio is closer to unity and almost invariant with time. On the other hand, the increasing trend of aspect ratios indicate the elongated plume in the case of BA. Here, it should be noted that the axial velocity of the plasma plume formed by front ablation of the thin film is also much higher than the observed plume velocity (∼3×10^{6} cm/s) in bulk lithium ablation [24]. By comparing the plasma plume formed by different geometries, that is, the front and back ablation of thin films and bulk solid ablation, the present study suggests that FA plume has a particular importance, and it can be used as a convenient tool for energetic particle production. Also, due to a nearly uniform distribution of the target material in a wide area, FA plume is ideal for large area thin film deposition.
A highly diverge and energetic FA plume and a relatively slower and directed BA plume could be understood as follows. The thermal diffusion length can be estimated by the relation, l=(Dt){1/2}, where D and t are the thermal diffusivity and the laser pulse width (8 ns), respectively. The estimated diffusion length is 1.8 and 0.17 μm for carbon and lithium fluoride films, respectively, which are larger than the present thickness of both the films. Therefore, uniform heating of the target film by a laser pulse is safely assumed. In the case of front ablation and for the considered power density of the laser beam, the incident laser rapidly heats the irradiated area of the target film, and its temperature nearly reaches its critical temperature [15]. This initiates phase explosion, and hence the vaporized target film is ejected from the substrate surface in the form of energetic and diverge plasma plumes as observed in Fig. 2. As we have discussed earlier, under similar experimental conditions, the plasma plume produced by the quartz plate supported thin film is expected to be more energetic in comparison to the bulk solid ablation because the loss of energy due to thermal diffusion is limited in the presence of a dielectric substrate.
On the other hand, in the case of back ablation, the mechanism of ablation processes is completely different from FA. In this case, the laser beam initiates the melting at the interface of the thin film and this melting process propagates across the film and reaches the front surface of the film [11]. The heating process by the laser beam continues until the vapour pressure at the interface of the film and the quartz plate becomes large enough to propel the film material from the substrate. The melt through time, that is time required to complete the melting of the film across the film thickness, is one of the important parameters which decides the dynamics and geometry of the ejected material. The melt through time depends on several factors, for example, the laser fluence, the pulse duration, the spatial profile of the laser beam, the film thickness and the thermal properties of the film. For the present experimental parameters, melt through occurs before the termination of the laser pulse, and the molten material is continuously heated by a laser beam and increases the pressure at the film-substrate interface. However, in the case of Gaussian laser beam profile, similar to the present case, causes the uneven melting of irradiated surface area. Melt through occurs rapidly at the central portion of the irradiated area where the laser intensity is maximum, and hence the target vapour gets released through a comparatively small opening (which coincides with Gaussian peak) in comparison to the beam size. This will prevent the further increase of vapour pressure by laser heating. As a consequence, the target materials are ejected with comparatively small velocity and more directed as the present observation depicted in the BA case.
The above argument is strongly supported by observed images at different laser spot sizes of the ablating laser. A comparative illustration of laser spot size dependence on the FA and BA plumes is depicted in Fig. 4. The sequence of images of FA and BA plumes for 1 mm and 0.5 mm beam spot diameters is shown in this figure. The laser energy is fixed at 100 mJ for both beam diameters, and hence the corresponding laser fluence for 1 mm and 0.5 mm diameters are 3.18 and 12.7 J/cm{2}, respectively. All other experimental parameters are identical for both the cases. As can be seen in Fig. 5, the plasma plume in FA geometry is significantly dependent on the laser energy density. In this case, a significant increase in axial as well as lateral velocity, and hence an increase in the overall dimension of the FA plume is observed with a smaller beam spot size (i.e., 0.5 mm diameter). The spot size dependence of plume expansion is more clear in plume dimension along the axial direction vs time delay plot as shown in Fig. 5. The average axial velocity of the plume is estimated from the slope of the best linear fit of the data. The estimated average axial velocity for 0.5 mm diameter is ∼1.02×10^{7}cm/s, which is 1.3 times higher than the observed velocity in the case of 1 mm beam diameter. Furthermore, it appears that for a smaller beam size, the plume becomes more spherically symmetric in comparison to that observed with 1 mm beam diameter. Also, due to the rapid expansion of plume (and hence faster adiabatic cooling), at the onset of time delay, a larger in size and less luminous plasma plume is observed in the case of 0.5 mm beam diameter. These observations are in line with the above-mentioned explosive ablation in the case of FA.
Laser spot size dependence on the BA plume is completely different from that observed in the case of FA. We could not observe any significant change in the dynamics and geometrical shape of the plume by reducing the laser beam diameter from 1 mm to 0.5 mm. It is interesting to see that even with the increase of laser fluence four times by reducing the spot size from 1 mm to 0.5 mm, the linear expansion velocity is comparatively lower than the observed velocity with 1 mm diameter as shown in Fig. 5. The average expansion velocity of the BA plume for 1 mm and 0.5 mm beam diameters are ∼1.36×10^{6} cm/s and ∼1×10^{6} cm/s respectively. This is again in agreement with the above discussed correlation between melt through time and BA plume velocity. Higher power density in a confined area facilitates fast melt through which prevents the build-up of vapour pressure by laser heating. As a result, the material ejected with a relatively lower stagnation pressure reflects in a slow expansion of the BA plume with 0.5 mm beam diameter.
As per the above discussion related to the ablation mechanism of the FA and BA induced plasma plumes, one can expect that charge particles are dominated in the FA plume as compared to the BA plume. This could be clearly visible in Fig. 6, where the ratio of emission intensity of Li neutrals (integrated area of emission lines) recorded in FA and BA configurations is plotted as a function of time delay. It has been observed that the ratios of Li I (BA) to Li I (FA) are always greater than one throughout the considered time delay range for both the ground state at Li I 670.8 nm as well as the excited state at Li I 610.3 nm lines. It has been observed that up to 400 ns, Li I 670.8 line emission intensity in the BA configuration is 9 times higher in comparison to that observed in the case of FA. With the assumption that emission intensity is roughly proportional to the number of neutral species, this clearly indicates that neutral species are dominated in BA plume in comparison to FA plume.
Furthermore, we have also compared the plasma temperatures (electron temperature) of FA and BA plumes which contribute significantly in characteristic features of both the plumes. The electron temperature is estimated by emission intensity ratios of two neutral lithium lines (i.e., Li I 610.3 and Li I 670.8) using the Boltzmann relation [25]
where I is the line intensity of the transition between two energy levels, ν is the frequency of the spectral line, A is the Einstein coefficient, g represents the statistical weight of the energy level, E is the energy, k is the Boltzmann constant, T_{e} is the electron temperature, and the subscripts i, j, k and l indicate the energy levels. As this relation is valid in the Local Thermal Equilibrium (LTE) condition, we confirm the validity of McWhirter criteria for the present plasma conditions which state that the minimum density for LTE is given by [26]
where T_{e} (eV) is the electron temperature and ΔE (eV) is the energy difference between the states. In our experiments, for the maximum electron temperature of ∼6.33 eV and the largest energy gap (2.031 eV) of the selected transition (610.3 nm), this criterion predicts a lower limit of n_{e}=2.95×10^{15}cm^{−3}. In the present case, electron densities (n_{e}) are estimated by the Stark broadening of Li I 670 nm line using the relation [27,28]
The electron impact parameter (W) for the Li I (670.8 nm) line is taken from Ref [24]. The estimated spatially (3 mm away from the target surface) integrated electron density at 500 ns for FA and BA cases is 6×10^{17} and 1.1×10^{18}cm^{−3}, respectively. Therefore, the electron densities satisfy the LTE condition. Here, the lower electron density in the FA case could be correlated with the rapid expansion of FA plume and have acquired a much larger volume at the onset of time delay in comparison to BA plume.
Also, the spatially integrated electron temperature (3 mm away from target surface) as a function of time delay obtained from FA and BA configurations is shown in Fig. 7. The spectroscopic data, required in relation (1), are taken from the NIST database. Here, the maximum shot-to-shot variation in integrated intensity is less than 2%, and therefore the overall maximum uncertainty in electron temperature measurement is approximately ∼5%. At 2×10^{−6} mbar, the estimated electron temperature shows the increasing trend with time for both the cases [Fig. 7(a)]. This increasing trend of the electron temperature might be because of the contribution of the luminous plasma plume close to the target surface which persists over a longer time delay. However, it is observed that the maximum electron temperature in the case of FA is ∼2.5 times higher than the observed temperature in BA. This is in agreement with the present observation, that is the plasma plume is more energetic and diverge in the case of FA configuration. We have also estimated the electron temperature in the presence of 2×10^{−1} mbar ambient argon pressure, where its trends are completely different in comparison to the observed variation in the case of a vacuum [see Fig. 7(b)]. At 2×10^{−1} mbar pressure, electron temperatures for both the cases (FA and BA) decreased with time where the estimated temperature in FA is always lower than the observed temperature in BA configuration. It is explained in the following paragraph.
The characteristic expansion of FA and BA plumes is compared in the presence of argon gas. Figure 8 shows the time resolved images of FA and BA plume in the presence of 10^{−2} mbar and 10^{−1} mbar argon pressures. The laser energy and the beam diameter were set to 100 mJ and 1 mm, respectively. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that plume dynamics, shape and luminosity changed significantly upon the introduction of ambient gas. At 10^{−2} mbar ambient pressure and in the case of FA, the plasma plumes are stratified into two components which are clearly separated after 400 ns, thereafter designated as fast and slow components. A bright portion associated with the target surface is sustained for a longer period. Initially, the emission intensity of the fast component increases with time and starts reducing with a further increase of time. Stratification of plasma plume in the presence of ambient gas has been investigated by several workers in the past [5,29–31]. A general interpretation of plume splitting is that the fractions of plume species have little interaction with ambient atoms and hence its velocity is comparable to the observed velocity in a vacuum. On the other hand, part of plume species suffers multiple collisions with ambient atoms, and therefore expands at lower velocities as compared to its fast counterpart. The above situation arises in the collisional regime where ambient atoms penetrate inside the expanding plasma plume [32,33]. At a fixed background pressure, the collision between plume species and ambient gas could be justified when the mean free path of the ablated species is of the order of plume dimension. We have estimated the mean free path of the plume species in the argon environment using the model based on sputtering of atoms by background atoms [34]. At 10^{−2} mbar argon pressure, the estimated mean free path for Li and C atoms is 13 and 15 mm, respectively, which is comparable to the observed size of the plume at this pressure and hence FA plume expansion in a collisional regime for this pressure can be assumed.
At a similar background pressure (2×10^{−2} mbar), the scenario is completely different in the case of BA configuration. It can be clearly seen in Fig. 8 that a luminous and nearly semi-circular front ahead of the plasma plume starts to develop around 200 ns of time delay. Since this front is clearly separated from the plume, it is considered as a plasma plume induced shock front. Also, the shock front expands with slightly higher velocity compared to the plume velocity and hence the shock front and plume get separated apart as the time evolves. The strong shock generation in the case of BA plume could be understood as follows: a relatively dense (less diverged) and directed BA plume compresses the ambient gas in a localized region more efficiently in comparison to the highly diverged FA plasma plume. Therefore, in BA geometry, the shock front is clearly visible. On the other hand, we could not observe any signature of shock formation in the case of FA at 10^{−2} mbar pressure.
With the further increase of ambient pressure to 2×10^{−1} mbar, the interpenetration between the plume species and the environment is limited, and a sharp contact boundary at the interface between the plume and the ambient gas is formed, as can be seen in Fig. 8. In this case, plasma plume experiences the resistive force and hence confined in a small volume. A sharp contact boundary and confinement effect is observed in both the cases (FA and BA). However, compression of plume species by the dense background gas is more visible in the case of FA where significant density jump (bright patches in the image) is observed at the leading edge of the plume. Also, the intensity as well as the lifetime of plasma luminosity is increased significantly in comparison to a lower pressure regime. This is because the collision frequency increased in a confined plasma and hence the probability of excitation of plume species is also increased. Furthermore, the visible examination of plume images in a vacuum and at 10^{−1} mbar of argon pressure showed that the FA plume is confined more efficiently (with respect to its size in a vacuum for the onset of time) as compared to the BA plume. This is because in the presence of an ambient gas, the kinetic energy of plume species transfers to the ambient atoms mainly through elastic collisions between them. As is already seen the FA plume is more energetic and thus leads to a rapid loss of expansion velocity, and therefore effective confinement is expected in this case. This is also supported by the observed electron temperature pattern in the case of FA and BA at 2×10^{−1} mbar pressure, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Unlike the case in a vacuum, the electron temperature decreased with time for both the cases, but the temperature of FA plume is always lower than the BA plume at a fixed time delay which indicates faster thermalization of FA plume. Here, it should be noted that the decrease of luminosity of the plasma plume due to the decrease of electron temperature in high ambient pressure is compensated by the increase of density due to plume confinement as can be seen for the high luminosity sustained for a longer time.
The plume expansion in FA and BA geometries and different pressure regimes can be presented in a better way by monitoring the plume length (distance covered by plume in the axial direction) as a function of time. As discussed earlier, plume expansion shows the characteristic dependence on different pressures of ambient argon gas. The variation of plume length as a function of time at various argon pressures, varying from 2×10^{−6} to 2×10^{−1} mbar in FA geometry, is presented in Fig. 9. At 2×10^{−2} mbar ambient pressure, the length vs time curve is plotted separately for the fast and slow components. Here, it is clearly seen that the expansion of the fast component is almost independent of ambient gas and it is similar to vacuum-like expansion. The slower part of the plume experiences the resistive force and its expansion is well fitted to the drag force model [35]. These are in agreement with the previous discussion of the plasma plume stratification by the introduction of ambient pressure. Also, the plasma plume expansion at 2×10^{−1} and 1.33 mbar, respectively, follows the drag-force model, which is stated by the equation
Here, β is the slowing coefficient and z_{f} is the stopping distance. The best fitted parameter gives the slowing coefficients β=2.3×10^{−3},2.5×10^{−3}, and the stopping distances are 8.73 and 8.57 cm at 10^{−1} and 1.33 mbar, respectively.
On the other hand, up to 2×10^{−2} mbar pressure, the ambient gas effect is not visible in BA geometry, where the plume dynamics followed the linear expansion, as shown in Fig. 10. In contrast to front ablation, at 2×10^{−1} mbar and 1.33 mbar, BA plume follows a shock-wave model, as it has been discussed in the previous discussions. The shock-wave model defines [36]
where E_{0} is proportional to the laser energy density and ρ_{b} is the density of the background gas. The best fitted curve shows the value of n to be equal to 0.4 under both pressures 2×10^{−1} and 1.33 mbar, respectively, which is in close agreement with the shock-wave model.
IV. CONCLUSION
A detailed investigation of the characteristic expansion of the plasma plume produced by front and back ablation of a thin film and its dependence on ambient pressure and spot size of an ablating laser have been presented. It has been observed that plume parameters, e.g., kinetic energy, shape, size, composition and plasma temperature, are completely different in front and back ablation geometries. The plasma plume expands at a higher velocity of ∼7.6×10^{6}cm/s and attains the spherical symmetry in FA geometry, whereas a nearly cylindrical plasma plume is observed in BA geometry which expands at a relatively lower velocity of ∼1.36×10^{6} cm/s in a vacuum. The line emission data show that front ablated plasma is dominated by charge particles whereas neutral species are the major constituents in a back ablation induced plasma. A highly energetic and spherical symmetric plasma plume is in line with explosive ablation (phase explosion) in the case of front ablation. On the other hand, laser spot size dependence data demonstrate the film removal through the small orifice resulting in the generation of a directed plume in the case of back ablation. Also, differences in the dynamics of expanding plumes in these two geometries are correlated with their ablation mechanisms and observed plasma parameters. In our opinion, the present results are highly suitable for controlling the plasma plume parameters in accordance with different applications.
TABLE I. 
Dynamical and plasma parameters of FA and BA plumes at 2×10^{−6} mbar.
TABLE I. -body
Parameters	Values in FA	Values in BA
Axial velocitya	7.6×10^{6} cm/s	1.36×10^{6} cm/s
Axial velocityb	1.02×10^{7} cm/s	1×10^{6}cm/s
Transverse velocitya	4.1×10^{6}cm/s	7.06×10^{5}cm/s
Kinetic energy of plume speciesa	∼359 eV	∼11.5 eV
Kinetic energy of plume speciesb	∼646 eV	∼6.2 eV
Axial velocity bulk Lithium targetc	3×10^{6}cm/s	…
Electron temperature (300 ns)	T_{e}∼2.83eV	T_{e}∼1.37eV
Electron density (300 ns)	n_{e}∼5.93×10^{17}cm^{−3}	n_{e}∼5.78×10^{18}cm^{−3}
^{a} 1 mm spot size.
^{b} 0.5 mm spot size.
^{c} See Ref.  [24].
FIG. 1. 
Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up.
FIG. 2. 
The sequence of images as a function of time delay (100 ns to 800 ns) of an expanding plasma plume at 2×10^{−6} mbar for both FA and BA geometries. Here, the integration time is set as 5 and 10 ns for a time delay of up to 400 ns and >400 ns respectively. (Color bar represents the intensity in arbitrary units.)
FIG. 3. 
Aspect ratios (length/width) of FA and BA plumes as a function of time.
FIG. 4. 
Time series of the FA and BA plasma plumes at two different laser spot sizes (i.e., 1 mm and 0.5 mm) at 2×10^{−6} mbar.
FIG. 5. 
Plume length vs time plot for both the FA and BA geometries at 2×10^{−6} mbar for the laser spot size of 0.5 and 1 mm.
FIG. 6. 
Intensity ratios of 670(BA)/670(FA) and 610(BA)/610(FA).
FIG. 7. 
Temporal variation of electron temperature in FA and BA geometries at (a) 2×10^{−6} and (b) 2×10^{−1} mbar.
FIG. 8. 
The sequence of images of FA and BA plasma plumes at 2×10^{−2} mbar (a), (b) and 2×10^{−1} mbar (c), (d).
FIG. 9. 
Axial position vs time plot in front ablation geometry at different pressures.
FIG. 10. 
Axial position vs time plot in back ablation geometry at different pressures.
