Modeling the electrical grid impact of wind ramp-up forecasting error offshore in the Mid-Atlantic region
The large wind resource and population centers along the Mid-Atlantic Coast of the United States make it an attractive region to develop offshore wind power. Understanding and accurately predicting the meteorology offshore is fundamental to efficient integration of these future wind farms into an electrical grid. Particular interest is focused on anticipating and reducing errors associated with wind ramps, which are characterized by rapid, sustained changes in wind speed over a period of hours. Using meteorological observations from a coastal buoy, we characterize 428 wind ramp-ups between 2005 and 2012 in terms of frequency, duration and magnitude, time and date of occurrence, and large-scale synoptics. From this group, we select 24 case studies that represent typical and extreme ramp-ups at this location and then model the impact that the forecasting error of these ramp-ups could have on the electrical grid. The case studies are modeled with the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model and compared with nearby buoy observations to assess forecast errors in ramp-up timing, shape, and magnitude. WRF frequently simulated ramp-ups too early, relative to observations, and often predicted the pre-ramp-up wind speed to be too high or the post-ramp-up wind speed to be too low. In the case of August 14, 2007, all three forecast errors occurred. The simulated impact on the grid is calculated by comparing the errors in forecast power with concurrent electrical load data in PJM's Mid-Atlantic Area Council-East (PJM-E) region. The largest impacts on the electrical grid were found to occur in the winter or at night in the summer. This framework allows for the identification of events that would potentially cause problems for the electrical grid in the PJM-E region.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of the wind power industry in the past two decades has shown that wind farms can provide great quantities of energy to electrical grids while producing less environmental harm than fossil fuel generation [1]. Recently, the installation of large offshore wind farms in the Mid-Atlantic region has been proposed and studied due to the favorable wind resource and low frequency of tropical cyclones [2–7]. Despite the lower environmental externalities associated with wind power generation, including dramatically lower life-cycle emissions of carbon and criteria air pollutants, wind power poses a variety of challenges to grid operators relative to fossil-fueled counterparts [8,9]. These challenges, largely caused by wind variability, in turn result in additional integration costs to the grid through increased cycling of existing power plants and elevated need for power resources on short-notice reserve. Current research is beginning to quantify the magnitude of these costs using a variety of analytical lenses and methodologies [10,11].
This study explores modeled forecast errors for 24 case studies selected from historic ramp-ups at a Mid-Atlantic site offshore of Delaware and analyzes the implications of these errors on grid operations through a novel methodology integrating concurrent grid dynamics with the forecasting error. Furthermore, we discuss these impacts on the need for operational reserves in the presence of a hypothetical offshore wind farm. Below, we describe the concepts of wind forecasting, wind integration, and the implications for long-run adaptations by electrical grids.
Several recent studies based on in situ observations of surface winds established the potential benefit of installing offshore wind farms in the Mid-Atlantic region. For example, Kempton et_al [12] and Garvine and Kempton [2] found that the strength and constancy of the wind in the Mid-Atlantic Bight are favorable for offshore wind development. Dhanju et_al [3] determined that the Delaware Atlantic waters (not including Delaware Bay) could support an average output of 5200 MW, which is roughly 4 times Delaware's average electric consumption. More recently, Kempton et_al [13] used a network of offshore buoys along the United States Atlantic coast measuring wind speed and determined that connecting wind farms all along the eastern seaboard would moderate fluctuations in power output caused by the passage of synoptic-scale weather systems. Furthermore, they emphasized the importance of careful characterization of both the steady state winds and the wind variability. Monaldo et_al [14] explored the variations in the offshore wind fields using Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data.
In addition, contemporary resource modeling studies [6,15] also show a favorable wind resource off the East Coast of the United States particularly from Virginia to Maine where conditions are favorable for high capacity factors and present low hurricane risk [4]. However, this resource is variable over many different timescales. Hughes and Veron [5] recently described the variability in the low level winds near coastal Delaware and showed that winds have been decreasing offshore in the spring and increasing in the fall over the past three decades. They also demonstrated that the largest source of summertime wind variability comes from the occurrence of coastal sea breezes.
Two principal needs for the success of offshore wind in the Mid-Atlantic region, as well as globally, are improved offshore meteorological forecasting [16] and flexible grid integration of renewable energy in the presence of forecasting errors. One important source of wind variability is wind ramp events which can be defined as intra-day phenomena characterized by a rapid change in wind speed and a resultant change in power production [17]. A rapid change from lower wind speeds to higher ones is known as a ramp-up, while a rapid decrease in wind speed and power is known as a ramp-down. Both types of wind ramps can have significant impacts on the operation of the grid, as the power output from wind generation can vary substantially and abruptly during either type of wind ramp [18,19]. If not properly forecast and/or anticipated by the grid, this marked change in output can increase short run system costs dramatically or even lead to grid failure. Ramp-up events are commonly seen in the Mid-Atlantic region under various intensifying weather conditions, such as low pressure systems, low level jets, sea breezes, and thunderstorms. Ramp-down events are commonly seen with the departure or subsidence of these conditions [17].
The possible cost savings and improvement in grid reliability provide great incentive for improving wind forecasts. We can consider the cost savings relative to the cost of wind integration. For example, the cost of wind integration in the Texas grid was $8.73 per MWh in 2008 and $3.90 per MWh in 2009 (Ref [9]) for under 10% penetration. Another study in Arizona [20] found integration costs of $3.25 per MWh at 4% wind penetration. In this study, integration costs were divided between within-hour regulation (∼10% of costs), hour ahead uncertainty (∼60% of costs), and day ahead uncertainty (∼30% of costs). Marquis et_al [21] indicated that with a nationwide 20% wind penetration scenario, roughly $1–4 billion per year could be saved with a perfect wind forecast. However, a perfect forecast is not achievable, which indicates the immense value to wind plant operators at having wind forecasts that are more accurate or with improved confidence levels. Lew et_al [22] supported this and added that the greatest cost savings come in the first 10% of improvement. While wind power integration costs include both the costs from stochasticity and variability, we believe that the majority of the total costs stem from stochasticity. While no data were found regarding the relative contribution of each factor, we note the rich literature addressing cost reductions from wind forecasting improvements (i.e., addressing stochasticity) and the ability of existing grids to regularly meet predictable but large daily changes in demand.
The main tasks for a grid operator are to match generation with demands at all times, while preserving sufficient contingency resources for low likelihood events and minimizing the total system cost. Choreographing grid elements cost effectively is a complex task [23], especially with high levels of non-dispatchable technologies such as wind and solar power, combined with varying loads, transmission constraints, and the need for sufficient contingency capabilities. Electrical grids in the developed world have sufficient generation resources to meet very high loads but are constrained by their limited ability to rapidly change electrical output on hourly and sub-hourly scales [20]. To withstand large contingency events, like a station experiencing an unexpected shut-down, grids enlist (i.e., pay) resources to remain poised to change electrical output on short notice. Such resources are often purchased in competitive markets as various ancillary services, meaning services that correspond to reserve capacity in varying latency ranges. For example, frequency regulation is an ancillary service that operates on the scale of seconds.
The ancillary service most relevant to wind forecast errors, however, is synchronized (operating) reserves with latencies on the order of several minutes. Operating reserves have been shown to be very effective at reducing the impact of wind forecasting errors [24,25]. More accurate wind forecasting can minimize the need for additional synchronized reserve procurement and therefore help to minimize wind integration costs. If sufficiently large forecast errors occur, the grid may need to enlist additional reserves over the long run at an incremental cost.
Wind power integration encompasses the steps needed and costs associated with adding wind power generation into an existing electrical grid without decreasing reliability and resiliency. Two main challenges for wind power integration are the natural fluctuations in wind speed and the inherent difficulties in accurately forecasting these variations, sometimes referred to as variability and stochasticity [26], respectively. The variability and stochasticity of the wind impose costs on wind power integration through different mechanisms. Variability in wind power requires more frequent cycling from dispatchable power generating units, meaning that conventional generation like coal and natural gas is required to change output levels more frequently and with a greater magnitude. This cycling results in lower fuel efficiency and higher maintenance requirements relative to operating at constant output. On the other hand, stochasticity of wind power requires the procurement of additional operating reserves, particularly in the case of a gross mismatch between predicted and actual available wind power. While this division is not absolute (stochasticity, for example, can also induce additional cycling), the distinction generally holds in most cases. Because the research in this paper focuses on forecasting errors, we create and interpret data through the lens of additional reserves needed by the grid, rather than the additional cycling which occurs even with perfect forecasts.
The challenges of wind power integration are magnified with increasing levels of variable renewable generation on the grid [27], creating a need for even greater flexibility [16,23–25,28]. This flexibility can take many forms such as keeping power plants operating below maximum so that they can quickly increase output, discharging additional power from energy storage installations, and reducing loads to match the decreased generation (demand response). For a typical grid in the US, the most cost-effective methods for integrating wind power include improved renewable power forecasting and redesigned electricity markets [21,23].
The rate at which the net load changes is fundamental to understanding grid responses, reserves needed, and associated costs [29]. This study investigates one of the important issues posed by offshore wind power integration, namely, the additional requirements on dispatchable generation for operating reserves and power cycling as a result of misprediction of offshore wind ramp-ups. This is achieved by identifying and characterizing large magnitude wind ramp-ups, forecasting selected wind ramp-ups using a numerical weather prediction (NWP) model, assessing the forecast error for these selected ramp-ups, and finally overlaying these error data with concurrent grid dynamics with the ultimate goal of assessing the extent to which we anticipate grid problems at different reserve capacities due to poor prediction of ramp-up events.
Errors in forecasting ramp-downs can also yield significant problems for the grid, requiring a significant amount of operating reserves. However, ramp-ups occur more frequently than ramp-downs in this observational dataset, an asymmetry found in other studies [30]. Ramp-downs were also more gradual, often taking 3–4 times longer than ramp-ups, which in theory allows the grid operator more time to bring operating reserves online to adjust to changes in power production.
II. DATA
The characterization of wind ramp-ups and selection of case studies is performed using meteorological station data. These results are contextualized using synoptic typing. The numerical forecasting model is forced with a data product provided by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA's) National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP). The calculation of the forecasting error compares model output with station data wind speed. Power demand data are used to provide an estimate of the impact of the forecasting error. The details of each dataset are given below.
A. Meteorological data
Observations of wind speed from Buoy 44009, operated by the National Data Buoy Center (NDBC) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/), were examined from January 2005 through December 2012. The buoy is located outside the mouth of the Delaware Bay, approximately 26 nautical miles southeast of Cape May, New Jersey near the Delaware Wind Energy Area (WEA), as shown in Fig. 1. Buoy 44009 has been recording environmental variables such as wind speed and direction at 5 m above the sea level every 10 min near continuously from 1984 through the present. Over our 8-year study period of 2005–2012, the NDBC dataset for Buoy 44009 contains missing entries with an occurrence of 16% or 15.7 months. These unavailable data primarily result from 2 large gaps of 3.6 and 10 months, mostly due to maintenance related issues. The available 84% of entries informs our analysis and interpretations hereafter.
Wind speeds observed at Buoy 44009 were analyzed to determine the frequency of ramp-ups from 2005 to 2012. This period was selected for the availability of archived NCEP model data used to force the NWP model and the completeness of the observational dataset. While Buoy 44009 is only a single point observation, there are no other publicly offshore wind observations located within 100 mile of the Delaware wind energy area. The frequency distribution of these wind speed data, plotted with the 8 MW wind turbine power curve, is shown in Fig. 2.
The representativeness of the large scale conditions was also examined using composite pressure and temperature reanalysis maps (http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd) from NOAA/ESRL Physical Sciences Division [31] created using NCEP/National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) reanalysis data along with synoptic typing data from the study by Siegert et_al [32] Synoptic typing, along with the composite maps, was used to characterize the atmospheric characteristics under which rapid ramp-ups occur and then determine whether or not the case studies selected for modeling are representative of typical ramp-up circumstances.
B. Model forcing data
For this project, we employed two different model products from NOAA's National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) as input to the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) mesoscale atmospheric model [33]: the Global Forecast System (GFS [34,35]) and the North American Mesoscale (NAM [36]) models. Both datasets are publicly available through NOAA's National Operational Model Archive and Distribution System (NOMADS [37]) and have been frequently employed as forcing data for WRF wind resource modeling studies [4,5]. The NAM model uses a 12-km gridded domain covering the North American continent, and the GFS model employs both 1.0^{°} and 0.5^{°} resolutions with global coverage. In this study, 6-hr data from NAM and GFS 1.0^{°} (GFS3) were used for simulating all case studies; the GFS 0.5^{°} (GFS4) dataset was included for dates after July 2006 when the forcing data became available.
C. Electrical grid data
Hourly load data in PJM's Mid-Atlantic Area Council-East (PJM-E) region are publicly available through their website (http://www.pjm.com/markets-and-operations/energy/real-time/loadhryr.aspx). PJM is an electric grid spanning 13 states in the eastern US including the land adjacent to the Delaware WEA. In turn, PJM-E is the subdivision of the larger PJM grid that is used in various planning purposes and comprises area in four states: the entirety of Delaware and New Jersey, as well as the eastern half of Maryland and southeastern corner of Pennsylvania. Hourly load data as well as the rate at which the load changed over time were investigated and then averaged monthly by hour of the day.
III. METHODS
A. Analysis of wind ramp-ups in the Mid-Atlantic region
Wind speeds from a meteorological station mounted on Buoy 44009 from 2005 through 2012 were analyzed to identify rapid wind ramp-ups and determine the frequency of these ramp-ups monthly, seasonally, and annually. Characterization of wind ramps has not yet been standardized [19,30]. Kamath [18] provided a definition of a ramp event as occurring between the time interval of t and t+ΔT if the change in power in that interval exceeds a predefined threshold P_{T}, as follows:
We define and isolate ramp-ups in a manner similar to Greaves et_al [38] Specifically, we define rapid ramp-ups as events in which the power output from a selected turbine increases by at least P_{T} = 4 MW (50% of nameplate capacity for an 8 MW turbine) within a period of an hour or less (10min≤Δt≤60min). To do this, wind speeds from the buoy anemometer are extrapolated to a hub height of 120 m using the log-law relationship [Eq. (2)], where z is 120 m; z_{r} is the reference (observation) height of 5 m; and z_{0} is the roughness length, which we define as “blown sea” of 0.5 mm (Ref [39])
The resulting wind speed frequency distribution is shown in Fig. 2.
The usage of an unmodified log-law relationship with a constant roughness length introduces a certain level of uncertainty into the wind calculations. Ideally, modifying the roughness length can be done using the Charnock relationship [40] to account for the varying sea surface. However, the challenge herein stems from whether to use observed winds or modeled winds to calculate the roughness length when attempting to compare large and rapid changes in wind speed that may or may not be captured effectively by the model. Additionally, previous research [41,42] has described the impacts of including a stability term based on Monin-Obukhov similarity theory and a term accounting for boundary layer height [43]. However, this approach requires observations at multiple levels in the atmosphere, and the observations at Buoy 44009 are only sampled at a single observation height. In addition, there is no local profiler information available in order to consistently account for stability or boundary layer height throughout the study period. Combining mesoscale modeling with additional observations at the site of any future offshore wind installations using additional observation heights and/or lidar measurements and suggested by these recent studies [43–45] would be extremely beneficial to improving the uncertainty of winds at hub height.
In order to determine the variation in the power output due to wind ramp-ups, it is necessary to calculate instantaneous power output for each available wind observation. Instantaneous power is calculated using the 10-min wind speed data from the buoy extrapolated to hub height and multiplied by the power curve. Finally, an objective algorithm was developed and applied to identify every significant change in wind power over a 30-min to 2-h period, which will be of interest to grid operators. Whenever a ramp-up was detected, the ramp-up period as well as data from 6 h preceding and following the ramp-up was stored for further analysis.
There are a variety of ramp-ups that occur in this period, but we limit our analysis to ramp-ups that cause a change in predicted power of at least 4 MW for a single turbine (∼50% of nameplate capacity) in an hour or less. This means that the duration of each individual ramp may last anywhere from 6 min to 4 h, which is an important timescale for grid operators [46]. We do not investigate ramp-ups that occur on longer timescales as was done for land-based wind in the Eletrical Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) region [47]. With the ramp rate requirement of ∼50% of nameplate capacity in 60 min or less, ramp-downs are 25% less frequent as ramp-ups and take 3–4 times longer. From this point forward in the article, we focus on ramp-ups and the term “ramp” refers to ramp-ups unless otherwise stated.
B. Selection of case studies
We selected two sets of ramps to model as part of our study of the impact of wind ramp misprediction on grid operation. The first set is composed of typical ramps selected on a monthly basis. The second set of ramps is extreme ramps that are unusual in either magnitude (at least 6 MW, equivalent to 75% of turbine capacity) or shape, such as the notable deviation in the slope from the monthly mean ramp slope. An example of an extreme ramp is 7 December 2006, where the ramp occurred over less than 10 min, while many ramps normally take closer to 30–60 min. For all ramps modeled, power is calculated using wind speeds from WRF and then compared with the power calculated with the observed wind speed. All events are evaluated relative to simultaneous demands on the electrical grid. Table I shows the dates for the ramps used in this study.
In order to evaluate forecasting error for typical ramps, it was necessary to characterize commonly occurring ramps. To do this, all the ramps detected by our algorithm were grouped by calendar month and then time-shifted to align at the mid-point of the ramp. The ramps were then averaged to determine the intensity, duration, and shape of a monthly mean ramp. In order to compare power generation with actual power demands, a least squares fit was used to determine which individual ramp (hereafter, historical analog) was most representative of the monthly mean. In November, we took the second closest fit due to problems with the forcing dataset. By studying the historical analogs, it is possible to examine the model's forecasting ability for commonly occurring ramps and to analyze the impacts of ordinary weather variability in the region [48].
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the historical analog selected for January very closely mimics the January mean ramp in both the shape and the size for the period spanning ±3 h from the midpoint of the event. The maximum 10-min difference in this interval between the mean ramp and the historical analog in January was 1602 kW with an average 10-min difference of 621 kW. As can be seen in Table II, the average 10-min difference between the historical analog and the average monthly ramp ranges from −621 kW in January to 521 kW in October.
In order to confirm that the 12 historical analogs occur during typical monthly conditions, surface pressure and temperature maps for each case were compared with those of the composite for all the ramps in the month to verify that the large scale synoptic conditions were similar. In addition, the synoptic type for each ramp was analyzed. Synoptic typing is a method that identifies large-scale atmospheric patterns (synoptic states) using a principal component analysis on atmospheric and surface conditions from weather station data [32,49–51]. Synoptic types are developed seasonally, each identified by a four-digit number. We use the synoptic typing developed by Dan Leathers and colleagues for the Mid-Atlantic using station data from Philadelphia [32,51,52], which is considered representative for the coastal Mid-Atlantic into New England [73]. Since there is some overlap in types between seasons, we have employed the descriptions and synoptic type coding laid out in the study by Siegert et_al [32] They employ letters to indicate dominant low (L) and high pressures (H), frontal passage (F), and strength and direction of flow, mostly coming from the north (N) or south (S). They also indicated the occurrence of weak patterns (W).
For clarity, we have reduced the complexity of having 9–15 synoptic types per season, with the types varying by season, to 8 categories related to the strength and orientation of the surface pressure gradient over the Delaware WEA. The surface pressure gradient was derived from the composite maps of the sea level pressure for each synoptic type, which were part of the study by Siegert et_al [32] The maps were made using NCEP reanalysis data. A strong pressure gradient is characterized as one that has changes in pressure greater than 1 hPa per 100 km. The direction indicates the predominant orientation of the surface pressure gradient in the four ordinal directions. Both the synoptic type and the pressure gradient type for the 24 case studies are included in Table I.
C. WRF modeling
The 24 case studies are modeled using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, applying three different forcing datasets. WRF is a state of the art, community numerical weather prediction model maintained by the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), and is fully adaptable to study the phenomenon over a wide range of scales [33]. The Advanced Research (ARW) dynamic core in WRF is employed in this study. ARW is widely used and has already demonstrated usefulness in wind farm-related studies (i.e., Dvorak et_al [4], Fitch et_al [53], and Davis et_al [54]). The WRF model domains (Fig. 1) include a grid point located at the site of Buoy 44009 (38.461 N, 74.703 W) to assist in directly comparing the model output wind speeds with the observational data. Model comparisons with observations are made at Buoy 44009 to decrease any errors due to horizontal extrapolation even though the Delaware Wind Energy Area (WEA) is actually located slightly north of this location.
The model domain contains 3 nested grids at 36-km, 12-km, and 4-km resolution (see Fig. 1) for runs forced with GFS data. For runs with NAM forcing, there are just two nested grids as the NAM data are already at 12-km resolution. The model suite of parameterizations was chosen to replicate those used in operational settings (Table III). The higher resolution GFS4 data were first made available in July 2006, and so case study dates after this time include 3 model runs, one with each forcing dataset (NAM, GFS3, and GFS4). For cases prior to July 2006, only two model runs were performed (NAM and GFS3).
WRF predicts the winds at 38 vertical levels throughout the atmosphere including at 10 m, a standard meteorological reference height. However, to better compare with observations, the modeled wind speeds at 10 m are extrapolated to hub height using Eq. (2); there are currently no observations above 5 m at this location. The extrapolated modeled wind speed is then compared with the wind speed based on observations from Buoy 44009, also extrapolated to 120 m. In addition, we compared the extrapolated model 10 m winds with those simulated at hub height to make sure that this interpolation did not introduce too much error. In general, the extrapolated model wind speeds at 120 m are 1 m/s higher than those modeled at hub height. However, this bias is often diminished during ramps and sometimes reverses. There is better agreement between modeled winds aloft and those extrapolated from model surface winds for runs forced with GFS in comparison to those forced with NAM data. The extrapolated wind speeds at height are also converted to power as described above and then used to assess model ramp prediction error.
All WRF model runs start at 12:00 GMT on the day before the event, in order to produce forecasts similar to those that would be used for the power bidding requirements for PJM's interconnection, and continue for 48 h. For example, the 12Z model output for the NAM and GFS models is available by late morning in the Delaware region, giving an operational forecasting team several hours with which to run their in-house NWP model and evaluate the forecast before bids for next-day power are due; initial bids for PJM during the study period were due at 12:00 local time, with a rebidding window from 16:00–18:00 local time. This is a reasonable scenario for how a forecasting team could operate for a wind farm constructed off the Delaware coast connected to PJM.
D. Prediction errors
In order to simulate the impact of prediction errors during ramp events on an electrical grid, the forecast wind is used to calculate the power that would be produced by a wind farm with realistic characteristics near the Delaware Wind Energy Area (WEA) using turbine power curves [19,60]. For the purpose of this analysis, the simulated wind farm consists of 100 u of an 8 MW turbine, which are assumed to experience no wake effects, transmission losses, or other losses due to things like maintenance, hysteresis, or icing, due to not quantifying these factors in the WRF model runs. A modern offshore-approved turbine, the Vestas V164-8 MW [61], is used as the model turbine and includes favorable power production at low wind speeds according to the power curve from the manufacturer. Low wind speeds are common in the summer for the region off of the Delaware coast [5]. Therefore, the Vestas V164-8 MW turbine is well-suited for the area.
The typical power output from the turbine power curve (see Fig. 2) was combined with the extrapolated wind speeds from Buoy 44009 to calculate the total power output of the hypothetical wind farm. To do this, the power curve was interpolated to a resolution of 0.1 m/s to match the observed wind speed resolution. The instantaneous power is then computed by taking each wind speed observation, finding the point on the power curve that corresponds to that wind speed, and using the instantaneous power output (P_{inst}) to find the total energy produced by the entire wind farm during that particular 10-min period, using P_{prod}=P_{inst}Nt. For this study, t corresponds to the time interval of the observation, 10 min, and N is the number of wind turbines in the wind farm. Total hypothetical wind farm output P_{prod} is in kWh, based on the input instantaneous power in kW. Then, the total energy production is determined by taking the sum of all these calculations.
The difference between the model-predicted and observed winds is evaluated in two steps. First, the total error (E) is calculated by subtracting the predicted power from the power derived from observations, resulting in a positive error for underpredicted winds. The slope, or rate of change of the produced power error per hour, is also calculated
This produced power error slope (PPES) helps to identify sudden changes in the forecast error magnitude or shifts from an underprediction to an overprediction. A very large PPES indicates that the magnitude and/or direction of the error has shifted dramatically and may result from a timing error or an error in the ramp shape. During these times, the grid would likely need to substantively adjust to ensure grid stability.
E. Calculation of problem power
Forecast error, determined by comparing model predicted wind power with power calculated from wind observations, is not sufficient for determining the severity and costs of grid impacts arising from poorly predicted wind ramps. The mispredicted ramp must also be placed in the context of major grid dynamics that occur at the time of the ramp. Of particular importance are the absolute loads, or the amount of power demand on the grid, and the rate of change in this load.
A forecast error that leads to vastly lower wind power generation than anticipated during increasing electrical loads, for example, has more severe impacts and grid responses than the same forecast error during a period of decreasing loads. During increasing loads, reserves may be required to fill a power shortfall because active power plants are already utilizing their ability to accelerate output in order to meet increasing loads. During decreasing demands, however, the same overprediction of wind power is unlikely to require culling reserves because the lack of wind power can be easily filled through existing plants simply maintaining output, rather than decelerating output as originally anticipated.
In these analyses, we draw on Kirby and Milligan [62] but add the context of concurrent load dynamics to ramp rates of produced wind power. We assume that wind forecasts are interpreted as fully firm by grid operators. Firmness is a term describing the extent to which grid operators incorporate wind forecasts as accurate and deterministic outputs rather than probabilistic projections. In reality, firmness of wind forecasts is incorporated at moderate rates by grid operators. The full firmness assumed here is a conservative estimate, as it overpredicts the extent to which a grid operating on moderate firmness experiences difficulty faced with mis-predicted ramps. Alternatively, a firmness of zero indicates that the grid operator has zero confidence in the wind forecast.
Three categories of ramp errors were identified as the most problematic and costly to the grid: (1) ramps with a large produced power error slope (PPES above +1800 MW/h or below −1800 MW/h); (2) ramps resulting in large changes in the combined load error slope (CLES above +3000 MW/h or below −3000 MW/h), where CLES is defined as the sum of the produced power error slope and slope of the load demand (L)
and (3) ramps with at least moderate PPES (above +800 MW/h or below −800 MW/h) and coinciding with total load >40 000 MW. These problem events are termed type 1, type 2, and type 3, respectively (Table IV). For example, if a ramp exhibited two ten-minute periods of +3100 MW/h power rate, the ramp would be determined to have two problem periods (both type 2) totalling 200 MW/h [i.e.,2·(3100MW/h−3000MW/h)] of problematic power.
We model the fluctuation of wind errors rather than the fluctuation in wind power because we assume that the grid expects and has been optimized around the wind power as forecasted. Each of the selected 24 ramp events were investigated to determine whether they caused an excursion beyond any threshold displayed in Table IV conditions over any ten-minute period. For each ramp at each threshold value, we determine the frequency of problematic events, as well as the total excursion beyond the threshold.
The most significant problems result from ramps resulting in large changes in the combined load error slope (CLES above +3000 MW/h or below −3000 MW/h, or type 2 errors). We also report occurrence of problem power at different thresholds to test sensitivity. The chosen threshold value for a change in the net load over time is ±3000 MW/h. This threshold is obtained from historical PJM-E load data, which shows 95% of all operating hours' experienced changes in load <|3000| MW/h over the 2005–2011 timeframe, as shown in Fig. 4.
In other words, we assume that the 5% most extreme rates of change in the load historically experienced by the grid represent situations that are difficult for the grid to respond to. This threshold value was varied by ±20% to test sensitivity and should only be interpreted as an approximation of possibly severe grid impacts. One major caveat to this threshold is that not all load slopes of similar magnitudes are equivalent. A load slope that is known in advance is less costly to satisfy than a load slope of the same magnitude that occurs with little warning.
IV. RESULTS
Using the techniques described above, the data from Buoy 44009 were used to simulate the amount of wind power produced by an 8 MW turbine. By evaluating the ratio between the energy produced based on observed wind speeds and the total theoretical energy produced if the turbines were continually at full production, capacity factor is 0.454, assuming no wake or transmission losses. This is based on each 8 MW turbine producing 213 GWh during the study period, giving a total farm output of 21 300 GWh or roughly 3050 GWh/y. Amongst all years with a greater than 90% data availability, the total annual energy produced ranged from 2830 GWh in 2012 to 3150 GWh in 2007.
A. General ramp characteristics
The application of the 50% ramp power criteria resulted in the identification of 428 ramps over the 80.6 months that the buoy was operational, with an average of 5.3 ramps per month (Fig. 5). The number of ramps is sensitive to both the power and time criteria [63]. The main ramp occurred in an hour or less but ramp-ups that pass these criteria can last longer. The simulated wind farm experienced changes in power ranging from 550 to 800 MW, with most ramps occurring at the upper end of the distribution. Similar criteria were applied to detect 336 ramp-downs during the period of study. This study focuses only on ramp-ups (ramps) which tend to be more acute, meaning that a larger change in power produced over a one hour period, while ramp-downs tend to be more gradual, occurring over several hours.
There were 127 ramps detected in the winter, 120 in spring, 76 in summer, and 105 in the autumn. There is notable interannual variability in the number of ramps detected using our algorithm, ranging from 57 to 76 per year for years with complete annual data (2005–2007, 2011). Similar to the ERCOT study [47], summer has the least frequent occurrence of the ramps detected by this analysis compared to the other seasons. However, this feature is not present in all years. For example, in 2007, the detected ramps are relatively evenly distributed across the seasons, with a slight maximum in winter.
The number of ramps per month follows a seasonal cycle, with the maximum occurring in April, followed closely by high ramp occurrence in February, March, and December. This is a weaker annual variation than that observed for land-based wind [47]. The minimum number of ramps occurs in August when average wind speeds tend to be low compared to the annual average [5] due to the semi-permanent presence of a nearby high pressure off the coast, while the maximum number of ramps occurs in the winter months. The ramps occur frequently when there is a surface temperature gradient aligned with the coast.
For all 428 ramps detected, nearly half of the ramps detected (N = 198) occur between 9 PM and 6 AM LST (Fig. 5). As the sun rises and the atmosphere warms, the number of ramps per three hours decreases by one third to one half. Then, the number of ramps increases again during the afternoon and evening hours. In the summer, most ramps occur between 9 PM and 3 AM LST, while in the winter, the ramps are also likely to occur during the afternoon from 3 to 6 PM LST. Ramp occurrence in the spring peaks in the late evening and early morning, while autumn ramps are evenly distributed throughout the night. If viewed by month, it can be seen that the highest occurrence of ramps falls during late night to early morning hours in most months, a time of day typified by low, stable electricity loads. In December through April, there are also a significant number of ramps that occur during the mid-day hours.
Although this study does not focus on the reasons for ramp generation, care is taken to ensure that the ramps selected for simulation are representative of ramps for this region. In this way, we are likely to be simulating forecast errors that could occur in the future. We do this by both examining reanalysis data for surface pressure and temperature [31] and investigating synoptic states [32]. Synoptic states can be used to connect the synoptic scale with wind power dynamics at a local site, similar to studies by Couto et_al [64] and Gallego-Castillo [30].
Examination of NCEP sea level pressure data for the ramps detected above focused on the strength and alignment of the pressure gradient over the Delaware WEA. This analysis showed that more than 40% of days with wind ramps occur when the surface pressure gradient is aligned with the coast, with sea level pressure increasing to the south [Fig. 6(a)]. There was not one orientation or strength of the surface pressure gradient that seemed unusually likely to produce wind ramps. In all seasons, there is a significant presence of a weak pressure gradient oriented to the south (Fig. 7). In the fall and winter, there are significantly stronger pressure gradients, with the pressure gradient most often aligned with the coastline. In the spring, the surface pressure gradient is moderate and aligned perpendicular to the coast line more than half the time; in the summer, the surface pressure gradient is very weak and is predominantly parallel to the coast.
As mentioned above, synoptic typing is another way of objectively sorting seasonal meteorological conditions into several independent states. Each season has a characteristic number of states and a typical frequency at which these states occur. There are some synoptic types that appear to have slightly more favorable conditions for large, sudden changes in wind speed. This is illustrated in Fig. 6(b) for the summer, chosen because it has the fewest synoptic types and so is the cleanest seasonal example. The likelihood of a particular synoptic type occurring is calculated as the percentage of summer season days that are of that type (gray bars). Then, for the detected ramps, the synoptic types are identified, and the percentage of ramps in our dataset occurring of each synoptic type is calculated (black bars). As shown in the figure, ramps are more likely to occur (>5%) for synoptic types with north-northwest flow (N2, N3) or when there is a New England Low (L5) and or an overhead high (H2); ramps are slightly less likely to occur (<5%) for synoptic types with weak southwest flow (S2) and southwest flow (S1). Although the details of this slight bias toward increased or decreased likelihood of ramp occurrence are present in the other seasons too, there is not a lot of consistency.
Over all seasons, wind ramps are slightly more likely to occur when there is a low pressure along the northeastern Atlantic coast (L5, L6), with northerly flow (N2, N3) which is often concurrent with intensifying conditions and particularly with high pressure centers located overhead (H2), near Philadelphia. Wind ramps are less likely to occur when there is southwest flow (S1, S2) or a high pressure over the Mid-Atlantic region which is often accompanied by subsidence (OfH). In both this analysis and the pressure gradient analysis, the 24 case studies are found to occur in conditions that are typical for ramps observed over the entire dataset.
B. Modeled wind errors
The performance of the WRF model varies with the synoptic condition and forcing dataset, which illustrates the difficulty in accurate prediction of ramps. Modeled ramp-ups tend to differ from observations in two general categories: ramp-up timing or ramp-up shape. For this study, a timing error is identified when the period of greatest change in wind speed is different from that observed by more than 30 min. A ramp forecast with incorrect timing can be as much as several hours early or late. The most common shape errors are (1) the wind speed before the ramp is too high, (2) the wind speed after the ramp is too low, or (3) the ramp is too gradual relative to observations. Six ramps, two historical analogs and four extreme cases, are shown in Fig. 8 to demonstrate the range of variabilities in modeled ramp conditions.
In the 24 case studies simulated in this project, 18 show an error in timing (Tables VI and VII) for at least one of the forcing datasets. Overall, 11 of the 24 simulated ramp-up case studies were predicted early using one forcing dataset, 7 were predicted early in all simulations. On the other hand, 7 of the ramp case study ramps were predicted late using at least one forcing dataset and 2 were predicted late in all simulations. Finally, in 4 of the case studies, the ramps were predicted either early or late, depending on the forcing dataset. Sometimes, the model predicts the ramp timing relatively well, such as for the extreme case on 19 December 2006 (Fig. 9). On 2 February 2007 and 13 June 2007, the ramp-ups are well predicted in shape but with poor timing (Fig. 8).
The most common shape error is an overprediction of the pre-ramp wind speed, which occurred in 14 of the 24 case studies, 9 of which were extreme cases. In these circumstances, the modeled wind speed is usually between 2 and 6 m/s higher than the observed wind speed before the ramp. This can be seen very clearly on 4 March 2005 and 13 June 2007 (Fig. 8). Errors in simulated post-ramp-up wind speed are smaller in magnitude than the errors in predicting pre-ramp-up wind speed, typically 1–2 m/s. A smaller than observed post-ramp wind speed occurred in 11 of the 24 simulated cases, which were evenly distributed between analog and extreme ramp-ups. In the extreme ramps simulated, the WRF model made this error more frequently when forced with the NAM data. This poor prediction of post-ramp wind speed can be seen on 12 January 2010 (Fig. 8).
Errors in modeled pre- or post-ramp wind speed lead to ramps that were detected in the observational dataset but not simulated as ramps by the model in 2 of the 24 cases selected for this study. In addition, the model forced with GFS data also missed one ramp that the model forced with NAM captured. As an example, on 4 March 2005, the modeled wind speed is too high before the observed ramp (Fig. 8).
Analysis of the ramp forecast error is done by calculating the difference in power predicted from the observations and from the model as shown in Fig. 9. Deviations in the ramp shape are particularly noticeable in the difference. For example, it is easy to see that the WRF forecast of the ramp on 19 December 2006 had winds that were forecast to be too high before the ramp when WRF was forced with GFS, and wind speeds were too low after the ramp in all simulations [Fig. 9(b)]. The accuracy of forecast ramps relative to observations was sensitive to forcing data but not in a consistent manner. For example, the forecast ramps from the runs with NAM forcing had slightly better timing than those forced with GFS data, but changes in wind speed tended to be more gradual. In several cases, WRF produced better post-ramp wind speed with the GFS forcing in the winter and summer; this effect is not seen in the transition seasons.
The 12 extreme ramps are high-magnitude, rapid ramps where the wind speed often increases from near calm to wind speeds at or above the peak of the wind turbine's power curve at 8 MW, all occurring in the afternoon between 3 and 8 PM local time during periods of high electrical loads. In some cases, the winds ramped up in under 30 min and then were highly variable after the initial peak in power. Although not by design, our analysis showed that there was a surface temperature gradient aligned with the coast and a very strong surface pressure gradient for all the extreme cases. In the summer, the extreme ramps also occur during periods of significant change in the load and so lead to large amounts of problem power (Fig. 4 and Table VII).
The maximum ramp rate for our hypothetical wind farm occurs on 7 December 2006 (Fig. 8) when the output increases from zero to nearly full power capacity in 6 min. This date was characterized by the passage of a surface low pressure system and an associated cold front passage accompanied by a strong pressure gradient resulting from a strong high pressure system over the central United States. For a wind facility of the size modeled, this would equate to a ramp rate of 800 MW over 6 min or 8000 MW/h, which is equivalent to adding the full capacity of a large thermal power plant in 6 min (Table VIII).
C. PJME grid dynamics
As suggested above, the impact of errors in ramp forecasting on grid operations varies not only with the type and sign of the error but also with the demand on the grid at the time the ramp is predicted to occur. Power demands tend to fluctuate much more slowly than variations in the wind, and persistence is often a reliable method for predicting demands [25]. The actual recorded load in PJM-E ranged from roughly 20 000–50 000 MW, while the load slope varied between +5000 MW/h and −4000 MW/h over the 7-year period between 2005 and 2011 (Fig. 4).
Winter days exhibit two high load periods, coinciding with waking hours in the morning and end of workday hours in the late afternoon. In summer months, daily load peaks are considerably larger and coincide with air conditioning in mid-day heat. Net load slopes are steepest preceding peak loads (in the positive direction) and following peak loads (in the negative direction), especially in the late evening. Throughout the course of a year, the greatest positive load slopes occur in the early morning hours. In the summer, this increasing demand continues all morning, while in the winter, the demand increases again in late afternoon and early evening. The most negative load slopes occur in the hours before midnight local time. Although this analysis aggregates business and non-business days together, in reality, business days of each month show somewhat greater peak loads and slightly more rapid changes in the load.
In general, the produced power error slope ranges from −4000 to 5000 MW/h with most changes falling within ±1000 MW/h as shown in Fig. 10. The change in the power demand shows similar features such that in the period studied, most problem power events occurred with the rate of change in the predicted power error (predicted power error slope, PPES) and the rate of change in power (power demand slope, PDS) within ±1000 MW/h. Figure 11 shows that the addition of wind power errors to the background grid dynamics increases the occurrence of very steep required grid power reductions (<−3000 MW/h). The story at the other end of the power spectrum is more complicated. In general, wind power errors also increase the occurrence of the very steep required grid increase (>3000 MW/h). However, the occurrence of the very steepest required power increase (<4000 MW/h) is decreased.
D. Occurrence of problem power
A total of 111 (62) problem events were identified for types 1–3 (type 2 only) errors in the 24 case studies modeled or an average of 2.6 excursions in the net load slope per ramp (Table IV). Type 1 events are ramps with a large power error slope (|PPES|>1800 MW/h); ramps resulting in large changes in the combined load error slope (|CLES|>3000 MW/h) are type 2 events; and ramps with modest changes in the power error slope (|PPES|>800 MW/h) and coinciding with total load >40 000 MW are type 3 events. Of the type 2 events, which cause the most significant problems, 40 (65%) occurred during the 12 extreme cases, while the remaining 22 occurred during the 12 analog cases. Analysis of the 24 simulated ramps shows that problem power of types 1 and 3 is most likely to occur in the summer and may occur simultaneously. Type 2 events occur most frequently in winter for the 24 simulated ramps, with the problem power starting around 5 PM local time.
Problem events were nearly evenly divided between positive and negative excursions. When the threshold for the acceptable net load slope is increased 20% to 3600 MW/h, the frequency of problem events decreases dramatically. With this higher threshold, a total of just 18 problem events occur, 14 during extreme cases and 4 during analogs. Again, these problem cases are nearly evenly split between problems in the negative and positive directions. For the historical analog wind ramps, most problematic power for the PJM-E grid occurred in the summer, overnight, or in the morning. If a problem power event occurred, it could occur at any time during the ramp. The frequencies reported above represent the average of findings for the three meteorological forcing datasets. While differences do exist among the ramp forecasts that employ the three forcing datasets, no forcing dataset was shown to be consistently superior.
In addition to cataloging the frequency of problem events for the 24 case studies, the magnitude of excursions beyond the threshold was also calculated. We refer to these excursions as problem power. The largest positive (^{+}) problem events, indicating net load increasing at rates far beyond the 3000 MW/h threshold, occur in the winter. The largest negative (^{−}) events, on the other hand, occur in the summer. Of the 24 simulated ramps, the single largest problem power period occurred in the summer on 14 August 2007 which was an analog ramp (Fig. 9). The problematic power occurred as multiple events from 0 to 4 GMT when there was poor and highly variable agreement between the modeled and observed winds, all during a rapid decrease in the load.
Extreme ramps also cause all three types of problematic powers (Table IV), where the total problematic power is greater than the total for the analog ramps, Table IX. Problematic power for the extreme ramps occurred most frequently in the summer and fall and in the afternoon and evening. In general, problematic power occurred at the end of the extreme ramps, except in the summer when problematic power occurred during the steepest part of the ramp.
Forecasts using GFS3 and NAM forcing data yielded over twice as many occurrences of problematic power for the 12 extreme ramps relative to their performance for the analog ramps. Furthermore, the summed problematic power for extreme ramps was 3 and 5 times higher than the comparable output for analog events for GFS3 and NAM, respectively. Forecasts using GFS4 forcing data were closer to observations, producing less problematic events and total problematic power.
V. DISCUSSION
One of the largest challenges in integrating weather-based renewable power generation, including wind power, into electrical grids is developing and implementing optimal grid policies, like the quantity of synchronized reserves required at any moment [23]. Wind ramps represent one of the more pronounced involuntary changes in generating output that the electrical grid must accommodate. The scheduling and purchasing of contingency resources as operating reserves relies in part on understanding the distribution of risks and errors associated with these ramp events. The grid will have the most difficulty responding to poorly forecast changes in power generation, such as with wind ramps, when the demand also changes due to behavior of consumers. These two sources of changes (wind errors and demand shifts) can either reinforce or counteract each other.
Wind ramps, which are sudden changes in the prevailing wind speed, are very difficult to forecast as they often occur with frontal conditions. In the 6.7 years of data analyzed in this study, 428 ramp-ups were identified using simulated power generation criteria following Greaves et_al [38] The detected ramps can take anywhere from 6 min to 4 h, with magnitudes of 500–800 MW. Ramps during December, February, April, May, and August typically occur during the late night to early morning hours, a time of day typified by low, stable electricity loads. Impacts of wind forecast errors during these low, stable loads are largely influenced by the source of baseload power and the ability of such sources to change output quickly and economically. Dramatically increased wind production during these times would require a reduction in output from baseload generation, the export of electricity from the system, or curtailment of wind power.
Conversely, ramps in January, June, September, and November typically occur at times categorized by increasing demands: early to mid-day. In this case, the occurrence of a wind ramp would require dispatchable generating plants that meet intermediate and peak loads to increase output less quickly or not at all. In March and October, ramps typically occur in the evening when the system experiences diminishing loads, resulting in a likely excess of supply. Although this study does not focus on the atmospheric dynamics that cause ramps to occur, the ramps selected for this study do demonstrate some common features. For example, wind ramps are more likely to occur when the sea level pressure gradient is weak and oriented parallel to the coast near the Delaware WEA. Wind ramps are more likely to occur when there is a low pressure near the Mid-Atlantic to Northeast U.S. coast and are less likely to occur when there is southwest flow.
The most challenging problematic power situations occur when the wind was overpredicted, forcing the grid to quickly increase output relative to anticipated conditions. Conversely, underpredicting the wind is relatively benign and can always be mitigated through simple curtailment of wind production. This study does not account for variation in the net load due to the substantial increase of solar power generation, which could greatly enhance problematic power after solar noon when generation decreases but the demand is still high.
A major incident of power unexpectedly falling offline (or a major anticipated source of power failing to materialize) causes greatest cost on the grid when loads are increasing most rapidly, for example, during summer evenings around 10 PM. We differentiate the concept of long term costs from short term costs, in that short-term refers to actions taken during the ramp event, while long run costs refer to defensive actions taken by the grid with the knowledge that unexpected events will occur at unknown intervals. The short run costs for an unexpected decrease in power are increased cycling of dispatchable generation and requesting power plants with high marginal costs to enter higher power states. In addition, curtailment of wind resources, as is required during certain periods of low demand and/or greatly under-predicted wind, also poses a cost because the grid forgoes electricity with very low marginal costs. Long run costs, on the other hand, would include the consideration for increasing the requirement of operational reserves if such contingencies increase in frequency.
Costs are accrued not only from scheduling the appropriate reserve capacity to respond to the interplay of power forecast error dynamics but also from the adjustments themselves. In the circumstance of net loads decreasing too rapidly (^{−} events), the grid operator has several options to adjust: curtailment of wind power, export of excess power, or reduction in output from dispatchable generation. To the extent curtailment is utilized, costs can be approximated by the marginal operation and maintenance cost (plus externalities) of the generator(s) that could have remained in a lower power state. If forecast errors result in dispatchable generation adjusting output, this will result in an increase in wear and tear, as shown in a power plant cycling study by NREL [29]. This may also lead to problems in scheduling reserve power [65].
A similar problem of rapid changes in net load straining grid resources is forecast to be of concern in CAISO grid serving California. Cumulative additions of large quantities of solar power in the CAISO region by 2020 are expected to cause a dramatic dip of the net load in the middle of the day. The tapering of solar generation and increasing electricity demand in the late afternoon yield a steep increase in the net load during this time. The evolution of this demand curve is a subject of research and commonly called a “duck” curve [66].
Several assumptions were made in this study. These assumptions imply some limitations to the interpretation of our results. For example, there is a growing literature that has demonstrated that while using a log law profile to convert the near-surface wind speeds to wind speeds aloft is appropriate for stable conditions, it is less appropriate when the atmosphere is unstable [16,42,43,67] and may lead to errors in wind climate of 1%–3% [45]. However, with no vertical wind speed profile observations available at this location, we are limited in our ability to quantify the extent to which this assumption biases our results [68]. Studies suggest that combining single-height observations with the mesoscale model can improve local wind profiles [44,45]. In addition, a recent study in Nantucket sound showed that the marine boundary layer near the coast may be unstable nearly half the time [67], depending on the geographic location.
The WRF model outputs both winds near the surface and winds aloft. Comparison between the output winds aloft and the output winds at the surface, which are then interpolated to hub height using the log-law for the case studies explored in this article, shows that there is a difference in wind speed between the two techniques of 1 m/s on average. However, this offset varies by case with the log-law over-predicting in some cases and under-predicting in others. The WRF model does employ the roughness length in calculating low-level winds, which may account for some of the differences between the output and extrapolated winds aloft.
Power production from the modeled farm is overstated because we have assumed no wake effects, no power loss from transmission, no down time, and a perfect fidelity to the manufacture's power curve. Studies have shown that internal wake losses for currently operating offshore wind farms can range from 10% to 40%, depending on numerous factors including climatology, wind turbine choice, wind farm design, and turbine spacing [69–71]. Instead of assigning an arbitrary amount of wake loss to this hypothetical farm, we provide an upper limit for the amount of power variation that would be produced by a wind farm of this size.
For this analysis, we have assumed that the operator assumes forecasts as fully firm or near fully firm. Thus, all else equal, our estimates of problematic power are overstated in a scalar manner to the ratio between fully firm forecasts (assumed here) and the actual firmness level assumed by practitioners. Another simplification our model employs is the lack of transmission constraints. This simplifies the model greatly, by assuming that available power anywhere in the grid system is sufficient to meet demands anywhere else in the system. If the offshore wind farm is sufficiently interconnected with the major demand hubs on the east coast, this should not greatly influence our findings.
Accurate prediction of the timing and intensity of ramps is not a simple exercise; ramps are all unique, as a result of microscale differences specific to each location and the varying types of wind-producing weather systems that can occur. Forecasters often use NWP models to assist in day-to-day forecasting. The application of NWP models has driven improvements in local (pinpoint) forecasting, but they are still inadequate for the requirements of the wind power industry [21]. A recent NWP study showed that forecasts for wind power could be significantly improved when forced by GFS and by assimilating new observations [72]. The largest improvement occurred when small under-predictions of wind power were corrected. In the current study, the accuracy of forecast ramps relative to observations was sensitive to forcing data but not in a consistent manner.
The impact of poorly predicted ramps on the electrical system varies greatly with contextual factors of concurrent grid dynamics like the absolute load and load change. In addition, grid factors like maximum ramp rates of dispatchable generation units, system-wide transmission constraints, and economic ordering among the dispatchable generation are also extremely important. This study emphasizes that the impacts on the electrical grid are greatest when forecasting errors occur in periods of high/increasing demands, when predicted wind power output is higher than actual wind output and when the grid responds to very high loads.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The Mid-Atlantic continental shelf is a region with a large offshore wind power resource, which is also characterized by significant wind variability [5] that is challenging for wind power prediction. Ramp-ups, when the wind transitions from low to high speeds on a short timescale, were detected for 17% of the days in our dataset relative to all days when the buoy was operating. We propose a new methodology for assessing the severity of forecast errors during ramp events on grid operation. Errors in forecast ramps exhibit errors in timing, magnitude, and shape, creating challenges for the wind farm operator bidding for power and the grid operator choreographing generation and transmission.
This study simulated 12 historical analogs and 12 extreme ramp with an NWP model, WRF, to study the impact of errors in ramp forecasting at the Delaware WEA on grid operations in PJM-E, the grid closest to the DE WEA. For each ramp, WRF was forced with NAM and GFS data. While WRF simulates most ramps reasonably, it frequently underestimates the pre-ramp wind speed relative to observations. The forecast error is sensitive to the forcing data, and no forcing dataset consistently outperformed the others.
Actual output of wind power from a wind farm configured like the one simulated in this project would likely exhibit a smoother production profile than that modeled here. Extrapolating wind speeds from one low-altitude buoy to high altitude hub heights over an area of hundreds or thousands of acres probably results in a production profile being unrealistically responsive to wind speed changes. Furthermore, we anticipate that synergistic smoothing of power production should multiple offshore farms located in PJM-E.
The standard forecasting metrics of ramp prediction were expanded to better understand the impact of ramps on the grid by developing three criteria which may lead to problem power for the grid. Poor ramp prediction may result in strain on the grid that tries to respond to an unanticipated loss or gain of power. The grid is most impacted by ramps when the demand is increasing; improved forecasting in the morning or early evening is likely to be beneficial to the wind industry. In periods of flat or decreasing demands, ramp forecast errors tend to have a less impact on the grid. In general, misprediction of ramp timing causes more problematic power than poor prediction of the ramp magnitude or shape.
For the modeled ramp-ups, the overall magnitudes tend to be underestimated due to overestimation of pre-ramp wind speeds. Extreme ramps, which cause a change in power production of at least 75% of turbine output, are most likely to cause significant strain on the grid and are found to occur 7–8 times a year. The greatest number of problematic events and the largest amount of problem power occur when electric demands experienced rapid changes concurrent with similarly swift changes in the forecast wind error.
As wind penetration increases in the Mid-Atlantic region, more reserve resources will be needed to cover potential power shortfalls due to wind speed forecasting errors. As shown in Marquis et_al [21], it is much more economical to improve the forecast than to increase this backup energy supply. We hope that this current study can help to inform grid operators on the errors that may be associated with wind ramps in forecasts for offshore wind farms.
TABLE I. 
The 24 case study dates selected for modeling along with their synoptic type. Cases are shown in seasonal order [winter (DJF), spring (MAM), etc.]. Synoptic types and surface pressure gradient direction are also described. Synoptic types are coded by high/low pressure or type of flow and direction, where GL indicates Great Lakes and OH is for Overhead. Corresponding codes used by Siegert et_al [32] are shown in parentheses where applicable. The pressure gradient force (PGF) strength is classified as weak for all cases.
TABLE II. 
Average 10-min difference in power between the monthly mean ramp and the historical analog.
TABLE III. 
Parameterizations selected for the model runs conducted using WRF.
TABLE IV. 
Ramp error description and frequency of occurrence.
TABLE V. 
Summer synoptic type and detailed description using codes employed by Siegert et_al [32] in parentheses where applicable. The surface pressure gradient strength (weak, strong) and cardinal direction are also shown.
TABLE VI. 
Historic analog case study description and model ramp errors. The error type listed is the dominant error detected. The last two columns indicate whether the modeled ramp wind speed was too high before the ramp or too low after the ramp.
TABLE VII. 
Extreme case study description and model ramp errors. The error type listed is the dominant error detected. The last two columns indicate whether the modeled ramp wind speed was too high before the ramp or too low after the ramp.
TABLE VIII. 
Required grid adjustment (problematic power) due to forecast error for analog ramps (MW/h).
TABLE IX. 
Required grid adjustment (problematic power) due to forecast error for extreme ramps (MW/h).
TABLE I. -body
Historical analog cases	Extreme cases
Case date	Syn/PGF dir	Case date	Syn/PGF dir
30 December 2007	GL low (L3)/S	07 December 2006	Cold front (F1)/S
12 January 2010	Cold front (F1)/S	13 December 2007	NE high (H4)/N
02 February 2010	Coastal low (L1)/W	19 December 2006	Coastal low (L6)/S
27 March 2007	Coastal low (L5)/S	29 December 2005	GL low (L3)/E
18 April 2006	Coastal low (L5)/S	17 January 2006	NE high (H4)/N
10 May 2011	N flow (N1)/S	19 January 2008	GL low (L3)/S
13 June 2007	NE high (H4)/N	02 February 2007	GL low (L3)/S
07 July 2011	SW flow (S1)/S	23 February 2010	Coastal low/N
14 August 2007	OH high (H2)/W	04 March 2005	Coastal low (L5)/S
30 September 2006	OH high (H2)/S	17 June 2008	NE low (L5)/S
19 October 2005	Coastal high/S	29 June 2006	SW flow (S2)/N
03 November 2005	OH high (H2)/S	10 August 2007	Weak pattern (W1)/N
TABLE II. -body
Month	January	February	March	April	May	June	July	August	September	October	November	December
P_{mm}−P_{ha} (kW)	−621	−31	−222	−113	19	−93	317	116	−149	521	465	−77
TABLE III. -body
Option	Setting
Planetary boundary layer	Mellor-Yamada-Janjić [55]
Surface layer	Eta similarity theory
Land surface	Noah land surface model [56]
Microphysics	Thompson double-moment 5-class graupel [57]
Longwave radiation	Rapid Radiative Transfer Model [58]
Shortwave radiation	Dudhia [59]
Cumulus clouds	Betts-Miller-Janjić Eta operational for
	36-km and 12-km nests, none for 4-km nest [55]
TABLE IV. -body
Event type	Conditions	Analog No.	Extreme No.
1^{−}	PPES<−1800 MW/h	1	6
1^{+}	PPES>1800 MW/h	3	13
2^{−}	CLES>3000 MW/h	7	23
2^{+}	CLES<−3000 MW/h	15	17
3^{−}	PPES<−800 MW/h, load > 40 GW	5	7
3^{+}	PPES>800 MW/h, load > 40 GW	2	12
	Total number of events	33	78
TABLE V. -body
Synoptic Type	Description	Pressure gradient
L5	New England low	wS
L6	Hudsons Bay low, frontal	wS
	Off-shore high	wE
H2	Overhead high	wW
H4	New England high	wN
N3	North-Northwest flow	wS
S1	Southwest flow	wS
S2	Weak Southwest flow	wE
W1	Weak pattern	wN
TABLE VI. -body
Date		Time (LST)	Error type	Detail	Pre Hi	Post Lo
30 December 2007		00:00	Both	NAM early, weak ramps		X
12 January 2010		06:50	Both	NAM late, GFS early		X
02 February 2010		11:00	Time	Models early		
27 March 2007		20:30	Shape	Ramps too gradual	X	
18 April 2006		04:30	Time	Models early		
10 May 2010		04:50	Both	Models early	X	
13 June 2007		09:10	Both	Models late, NAM small ramp	X	
07 July 2011		14:50	Time	Models early	X	
14 August 2007		00:20	Time	Models early	X	X
30 September 2006		13:00	Shape	NAM WS varies		X
19 October 2005		23:10	Time	GFS3 early		
03 November 2005		08:10	Shape	Ramps too gradual		X
TABLE VII. -body
Date		Time (LST)	Error Type	Detail	Pre Hi	Post Lo
07 December 2006		17:00	Both	Models early	X	
13 December 2007		15:50	Both	NAM late, GFS early	X	
19 December 2006		17:10	Shape	GFS high pre, NAM low post	X	X
29 December 2005		17:20	Shape	NAM lo post		X
17 January 2006		15:30	…	No ramp	X	
19 January 2008		15:10	Both	Models late	X	
02 February 2007		18:30	Both	GFS early, NAM late	X	
23 February 2010		16:40	…	No ramp	X	X
04 March 2005		18:40	Both	NAM early, GFS3 No Ramp	X	
17 June 2008		18:50	Time	Models early		
29 June 2006		17:10	Shape	NAM late		X
10 August 2007		20:10	Both	NAM early, GFS late	X	X
TABLE VIII. -body
Model	Type 1^{−}	Type 1^{+}	Type 2^{−}	Type 2^{+}	Type 3^{−}	Type 3^{+}
NAM	−307	1618	1508	−3930	−812	402
GFS3	−236	1423	3271	−4977	−2193	133
GFS4	−8	1865	2360	−5692	−3009	583
Average NAM/GFS3	−271	1520	2390	−4453	−1502	267
Average incl GFS4	−184	1635	2380	−4866	−2005	372
TABLE IX. -body
Model	Type 1^{−}	Type 1^{+}	Type 2^{–}	Type 2^{+}	Type 3^{−}	Type 3^{+}
NAM	−6591	14 082	13 956	−13 765	0	18 143
GFS3	−5732	13 399	11 481	−11 938	−8493	13 737
GFS4	−2248	11 721	11 250	−7357	−4793	9523
Average NAM/GFS3	−6162	13 740	12 718	−12 852	−4246	15 940
Average incl GFS4	−4857	13 067	12 229	−11 020	−4429	13 801
FIG. 1. 
The primary image shows a map of the study area showing the location of Buoy 44009 (indicated by a red X), along with the WRF model domains, including nested grids with the domain grid sizes indicated red. Note that the model runs with GFS3/GFS4 forcing use of all three domains, while the runs forced with NAM model data include the two inner domains (d02 and d03 in this figure). The inset depicts the Delaware Wind Energy Area, in purple, and its proximity to Buoy 44009 and the Delaware coast. The inset is adapted from the Delaware Activities map of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (http://www.boem.gov/Delaware/).
FIG. 2. 
Frequency distribution of wind speeds at Buoy 44009 at a hub height of 120 m. The power curve (in red) for the selected 8 MW wind turbine used in the analysis is also shown.
FIG. 3. 
Example of the historical analog for January and how it is compared with other January ramps. The ramp is highlighted by the gray box.
FIG. 4. 
(a) Average load (MW) and (b) average rate of change of the load (MW/h) by both local hour and month for data from 2005 to 2011. In (a), the deeper colors indicate periods of high demands, while the paler colors indicate lower demands. Asterisks (*) show when there are 4 or more ramps detected in the buoy wind speed data within that month and hour, and circles (o) show the historical analog ramp-ups. In (b), the red colors (solid contours) indicate periods when the load is increasing, while the blue colors (dashed contours) indicate periods with the decreasing load; x show the extreme ramp-ups selected for this study.
FIG. 5. 
Boxplots of the 428 ramp-ups detected by the ramp algorithm (a) by time of day (every 3 h) and (b) by month, for each year of the 8-year record, showing the interannual variability. The line on each box is the median, while the box edges are at the 25th and 75th percentiles. The whiskers show the range of data, with a cross (+) marking any outliers.
FIG. 6. 
(a) Direction and strength of the sea level pressure gradient force for all days in the dataset and all detected ramp-ups as a percentage of total days or total days with ramps. Pressure gradients are labeled as weak (w) or strong (s) and by the orientation of the pressure gradient force in the four ordinal directions. (b) Percentage of summer days sorted by synoptic type codes from the study by Siegert et_al [32] (see Table V for the description) for all days in the dataset (gray bars) and for all summer ramp days (black bars). Types are generally defined by low (L) or high (H) pressures somewhere along the east coast or northerly (N) or southwesterly (S) flow. An offshore high is indicated by OfH.
FIG. 7. 
Percentage of ramps per season organized by the strength (weak, strong) and direction of the sea level pressure gradient force over the Delaware WEA.
FIG. 8. 
Comparison of the WRF modeled wind speeds at Buoy 44009 extrapolated to a hub height of 120 m using all three forcing data sources (green, red, blue lines) with observations (black, solid lines) for the selected cases: (a) 7 December 2006, (b) 12 January 2010, (c) 2 February 2007, (d) 4 March 2005, (e) 13 June 2007, and (f) 29 June 2006. Note that the GFS4 input data were not available before July 2006.
FIG. 9. 
(a)–(c) show the ramp of 19 December 2006. (a) shows the power output based on observations and the model output. (b) shows the error defined as observations minus models, while (c) shows the produced power error slope (PPES). (d)–(f) show the ramp on 14 August 2007, with axes as in (a)–(c).
FIG. 10. 
Scatter plot of the produced power error slope (PPES) and the predicted demand (load) slope (PDS) for the 12 extreme events.
FIG. 11. 
(a) Frequency distribution of the change in the produced wind power and the change in the error of the forecast wind relative to observations (PPES) and (b) power demand slope (PDS) and rate of change of the error slope. (c) Frequency distribution of the adjustments that the grid will have to adjust to the error in the wind forecast. All figures are for the extreme case studies.
