Resonance transparency with low-loss in toroidal planar metamaterial
A compact planar construction composed of asymmetric split ring resonators was designed with a low-loss, high Q-factor resonance transparency at microwave frequency. The singularity property of the proposed metamaterial owing to the enhanced toroidal dipole T is demonstrated via numerical and experimental methods. The transmission peak can reach up to 0.91 and the loss is perfectly repressed, which can be testified by radiated power, H-field distributions, and the imaginary parts of effective permittivity and permeability. The designed planar metamaterial may have numerous potential applications at microwave, terahertz, and optical frequency, e.g., for ultrasensitive sensing, slow-light devices, lasing spacers, even invisible information transfer.
I. INTRODUCTION
The toroidal dipolar family, which is covered by the traditional electric and magnetic dipolar family in natural materials, has been considered a higher-order correction in multipole expansion for so long [1,2]. In 1958, the toroidal dipole was first theoretically introduced by Zel'dovich [3] and subsequently applied in the domain of nuclear physics, classical electrodynamics, and so on [4–8]. The formation of a toroidal dipole can be introduced by current flowing on the toroid surface along the meridian.
It is a challenge to strengthen the toroidal dipole and restrain the electric and magnetic dipole. Owing to the complicacy of construction, the range of applications is confined. Metamaterial, an artificially designed material, has many special properties that natural materials do not have, such as negative refractive index and subwavelength property, and can be applied in numerous fields, such as microwave, terahertz, and optical frequencies [9–19]. In 2010, the toroidal dipole, which was several orders of magnitude higher than other multipoles, was first verified in an experiment by introducing 3D metamaterial construction [20]. Afterwards, the studies and the applications of the toroidal dipole response were seriously undertaken by scientific researchers in many fields, such as electromagnetic-induced transparency, absorber, circular dichroism, sensitive, invisible information transfer, and nonmagnetic materials [21–32].
Due to numerous limitations of fabrication and utilization of three-dimensional construction, the planar structure, which is easy to implement and suitable for a wider range, has been used more and more in recent years [29,33–37]. By adopting a rational design of metallic patterning in microwave wavelength regions, the electromagnetic field inside the dielectric substrate is confined within asymmetric split ring resonators (ASRRs) to diminish the loss and strengthen the Q-factor [38]. The subwavelength structure with a relatively higher Q-factor in our design can be extended to THz and optical frequency via suitable size reduction [35,37,39].
The metamaterial construction proposed in this paper with enhanced toroidal dipole T and repressed electric dipole P can realize the transmission peak value, instead of the transmission dip [40], and simultaneously attain the minimum radiation and absorption loss.
II. DESIGN AND FABRICATION
An asymmetric low-loss planar meta-atom composed of ASRRs was designed that could enhance the toroidal dipole to a detectable level and, meanwhile, visibly suppress the electric dipole. It is the slight asymmetry that can excite resonators by the normally incident electromagnetic wave with x-polarized electric field, then a couple of anti-phase surface current loops can form on the ASRRs [41].
The construction and dimension of the meta-atom are shown in Fig. 1(a). The ASRR used copper (0.035 mm thickness), which was etched onto the 1-mm-thick lossy F4B substrate with permittivity ε_{r} = 2.65 by using the PCB (Printed Circuit Board) process. The whole metamaterial formed by 12 × 12 arrays of meta-atom is arranged periodically in the x and y directions, with an overall dimension of 144 × 144 mm^{2}, as revealed in Fig. 1(b). In the experiment, the transmission is measured in free space by using a vector network analyzer (Agilent PNA E8362B) with two linearly polarized double-ridged horn antennas.
III. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
As shown in Fig. 2, the simulation is performed by using the CST Microwave Studio. The transmission spectrum of the metamaterial measured for x-polarization revealed a very narrow transmission peak at 13.4 GHz (marked as II), where the value of amplitude is as high as 0.91, and two transmissions dip, at 12.7 GHz and 13.74 GHz (marked as I and III, respectively). The sharp spectral response II in transparency has the width of only 0.24 GHz at 3 dB, so the Q-factor of the subwavelength construction could attain 55.5 at the microwave region. Because of the dramatically suppressed electric dipole, the vast majority of the incident wave along the z-axis can thread the metamaterial, with negligible dissipation. The high transmission peak 0.91 emerged at 13.4 GHz.
The high Q transparency resonance was clearly observed and measured in the experimental curve, which is in good agreement with the calculation result presented in Fig. 2. However, there is a slight discrepancy, in that the experimental curve has a small blue shift due to the measurement environment, with external disturbance and fabrication tolerance.
For a deeper comprehension of the coupling mechanism between ASRRs, the simulated surface current is presented in Fig. 3(a). As shown in Fig. 3(a), a set of surface current flowing in the metallic structure with antiphase can be excited at point II, when the incident electromagnetic wave normally illuminates on the metamaterial with x-polarized electric field. For the current magnitude that is almost identical, electric dipoles P of the adjacent SRRs are counteracted mutually, and the radiated power of P drops down rapidly, as shown in Fig. 4. The magnetic dipoles M aligned anti-parallel along the z-axis inside ASRRs induced by the anti-phase surface current can be seen as a head-to-tail magnetic dipolar moment that forms the toroidal dipole T with y-direction, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Because the surface current both in the upper and lower arm are in-phase and obviously stronger than other sections of the SRR, the x-component of P reaches the maximum value and plays a dominating role compared with other multipoles at points I and III, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The SRR has strong coupling to free space, so the electromagnetic wave barely passes through the metamaterial.
To analyze the effect of each multipole in forming the measured response, the radiated power of the multipoles in the far field could be counted on the basis of the density of the conducting current. The radiated power of multipoles can be obtained from the following formula [27]:
The first and second terms indicate the radiated power of traditional electric and magnetic dipole, respectively. The third term is from the toroidal dipole radiation. The fourth and fifth terms are the radiated power of electric and magnetic quadrupoles. The last term corresponds to the higher-order correction. The electric dipole P, magnetic dipole M, toroidal dipole T, and electric and magnetic quadrupoles Q_{e} and Q_{m} are calculated based on the density of current that is extracted from simulation results. The computed radiated power of the multipoles moment is shown in Fig. 4. Only six of the strongest multipolar excitations, several orders of magnitude higher than the others, are displayed to ensure clearer figure.
The transmission of the electromagnetic wave could be represented by
In Eq. (2), E_{scattered} is the radiation caused by the induced multipoles along the direction of the incident wave [42]. At the 13.4 GHz transparency peak (point II), P_{x} suppressed by the symmetric current has a sharp drop, and the E_{scattered} that touches the deep value has the same trend with P_{x}. If the incident electromagnetic wave E_{incident} remains constant, the x-polarized transmission could achieve the maximum value. At the two points I and III, the x-component of the electric dipole P_{x} reaches the crest, and E_{scattered} also attains the maximum. The incident electromagnetic wave is mightily scattered by P_{x}, so the transmission spectrum reaches the minimum.
The transmission curve can obtain a relatively high Q-factor owing to the low radiated loss reduced by the enhanced T_{y} and suppressed P_{x}, as shown in Fig. 4. In the meantime, magnetic field can be firmly constrained within the framework by the detectable T_{y} and no radiation energy transmits outward at 13.4 GHz [43], as shown in Fig. 3(c). The high magnetic quadrupole Q_{m} produced by ASRR nearly approached T_{y} at point II and severely restricted the Q-factor value.
As a result of the subwavelength structure of the meta-atom, the imaginary parts of effective electromagnetic parameters, which can illustrate the low absorption loss property of the metamaterial at the transparency point, are computed according to the effective medium theory, as shown in Fig. 5. The imaginary parts of the effective permittivity Im(ε) reaching the crest at two transparency dips (points I and III) can explain that the loss of proposed construction goes to the peak value and the incident electromagnetic wave almost wears down. At the transparency point II, Im(ε) and Im(μ) (i.e., the imaginary parts of effective permittivity and permeability, respectively) are both small and almost close to zero, which illustrates that the high transmittance at the transmission peak results from the low-loss peculiarity of the construction.
IV. CONCLUSION
We designed and manufactured a planar metamaterial that possesses the character of low-loss and high Q-factor transmissivity in virtue of the miraculous toroidal dipole and the suppressed electric dipole. The toroidal dipole stems from the anti-phase surface current flowing in the slight asymmetric SRR. The loss could be powerfully inhibited, as demonstrated by the radiated power, intense electromagnetic field restriction, and the imaginary parts of ε and μ. The resonance transparency arises at the spectrum of the microwave range, while it can be increased to terahertz even optical frequency through reducing the geometric dimension of the pattern. The wizardly nature of the proposed structure could be exploited for application in ultrasensitive sensing, slow-light devices, lasing spacers, and filters.
FIG. 1. 
(a) Schematic diagram of a unit cell. The structure parameters are p = 12 mm, w = 0.5 mm, g = 0.3 mm, lx = 5.5 mm, ly = 7 mm, and d = 0.4 mm. (b) Full view of the planar toroidal metamaterial.
FIG. 2. 
Simulated and measured transmission spectra of the toroidal dipolar structure with x-polarized wave.
FIG. 3. 
(a) Surface current distribution in the metallic structure at 12.7 GHz, 13.4 GHz, and 13.74 GHz; (b) the vortex H-field distribution on the x-z plane at the transparency peak 13.4 GHz in tilted view; (c) z-component of H-field intensity confined in the graphic pattern at 13.4 GHz.
FIG. 4. 
Radiated power of the six strongest components of multipolar excitations.
FIG. 5. 
The imaginary parts of ε and μ of the metamaterial.
