Micro-spot gamma-ray generation based on laser wakefield acceleration
The radiography of gamma-ray is one of the most important non-destructive testing in many fields. However, the spot size is always in millimeter scale for the generation of gamma-ray by conventional way. As the development of laser wakefield acceleration, the electron beam with small divergence and spot size can be generated easily in the experiment by tens of terawatt ultra-short laser pulse. Based on this electron beam, gamma-ray with micro spot size is generated and the properties are measured and tested in detail experimentally. The experiment demonstrates that the spot size of this gamma-ray is always smaller than 200 μm, no matter the conversion target thickness, and can be as small as about 40 μm when the conversion target thickness of 0.2 mm is used. The spatial resolution of this gamma-ray is much better than 2.5 LP/mm, the fitting temperature (which is relative to the average energy of gamma-ray) is between 5 MeV and 8 MeV, and the maximum yield per shot of the gamma-ray can be up to 9.1 × 10^{9} photons (energy higher than 1 MeV). High-resolution radiography shows that the areal density of the gamma-ray radiography can be up to 51.3 g/cm^{2} (stainless steel thickness equivalent is about 6.5 cm). Such micro-spot gamma-ray can play an important role in the high-resolution radiography of high areal density objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
The research and applications of X-ray have played a very important role in our society since it was discovered in 1895 by W. C. Roentgen in Germany. The X-ray radiography can help us to investigate the complex inner structures without destruction of the object and is widely used in many fields such as medicine, material, and scientific research. The spot size of X-ray can be controlled as small as several micrometers in a lower energy range by X-ray machines. However, the high energy (multi-MeV or much higher) X-ray (which is usually called gamma-ray) that is needed in the detection of industry products or other high areal density objects can be supplied only by electron accelerator facility, in which the spot size of the electron beam is much bigger (usually several millimeters), as shown in Fig. 1. When the X/gamma-ray is generated by Bremsstrahlung process, its spot size and also the spatial resolution are limited by the bigger spot size of the electron beam.
As the development of intense laser pulse, the gamma-ray generation based on laser pulse was first reported by Whitlock in 1987 [1] to achieve high-resolution radiography of the high areal density object. After that, several laboratories reported their results about the generation and application of gamma-ray based on the interaction of intense picosecond laser pulse with overdense solid foils [2,3]. The properties of this gamma-ray, such as energy spectrum, dose distribution, spot size and so on, were measured and tested in detail by Courtois from 2009 to 2013 [4–7], which shows that the spot size of this gamma-ray is less than 350 μm, the dose is about 2 rad in air at 1 m, and the high-resolution radiography shows that the areal density of gamma-ray radiography can be up to 61 g/cm^{2} with few hundred micrometers spatial resolution.
Besides the intense picosecond laser pulse, the micro-spot gamma-ray can also be generated from femtosecond laser pulse based on the laser wakefield acceleration. The wakefield acceleration based on the interaction of ultra-short laser pulse with underdense plasma has been researched widely since 2004 [8–10], when the generation of quasi-monoenergetic electron beams were reported by different groups. Stable electron beams with tunable energy can be achieved by different injection processes. Benefit from the much smaller spot size and beam divergence of the electron beam generated in the laser wakefield acceleration, the high energy Bremsstrahlung radiation with micro-spot gamma-ray, can be produced easily by this way [11]. As early as 2005 [12], such gamma-ray was first generated by the laser wakefield, in which the electron beam divergence is about 17 mrad (FWHM) and the energy spectrum is quasi-Maxwellian distribution with the fitting temperature of about 40 MeV, and the gamma-ray spot size is measured to be about 450 μm by the knife-edge technique. At 2011 [13], the spot size was improved to about 30 μm by the same way when the optimal electron beam was used, in which the beam divergence was decreased to about 5 mrad (FWHM) and the energy spectrum is quasi-monoenergetic with the peak energy of about 80 MeV. The stability of the electron beam generation for gamma-ray can be improved by ionization injection in the laser wakefield [14]. Besides such Bremsstrahlung gamma-ray, betatron radiation by the electron from the wakefield is another important way for the gamma-ray generation and has been investigated widely in the last ten years. The space resolution of such gamma-ray can be only several micrometers [15–18]; such radiation is usually used for high resolution radiography [18] and phase contrast imaging [16].
However, the properties of the gamma-ray from Bremsstrahlung by the interaction of electron with the high-Z target in the wakefield have never been measured in the experiment at the same time, such as spot size, spatial resolution, energy spectrum, and the yield. This paper is organized as follows: Sec. II shows the electron beam parameters that are needed for the micro-spot gamma-ray obtained by Monte Carlo simulations and the generation of such electron beams based on laser wakefield acceleration. Section III describes the generation of micro-spot gamma-ray experimentally and also the measurements of spot size, energy spectrum, space resolution, and so on. The conclusion is presented in Sec. IV.
II. GENERATION OF SMALL DIVERGENCE ELECTRON BEAM
Similar to the generation of conventional gamma-ray, there are two processes in the laser driven gamma-ray. One is the optimized electron beam generation from the laser wakefield and the other is the Bremsstrahlung radiation by the electron beam from a dense conversion target. To find the optimal electron properties that are needed in the generation of micro-spot gamma-ray, Monte Carlo simulations have been conducted in detail based on the Bremsstrahlung process. In the simulation, the dense target is tungsten and the initial spot size of the electron beam is 20 μm (FWHM), which is similar to the focused spot size of the laser pulse usually used in experiment. The dense target thickness and the electron beam divergence are changed in the simulations to find the optimal conditions for the micro-spot gamma-ray generation. Figure 2 shows the relationship of gamma-ray spot size with the beam divergence and the target thickness. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the spot size increases with the increase in the target thickness and the beam divergence. In contrast to the target thickness, the influence of the beam divergence on the gamma-ray spot size is much clearer, and it is impossible to generate gamma-ray with the spot size smaller than 100 μm when the beam divergence is larger than 100 mrad. However, the gamma-ray with the spot size of about 40 μm can be generated when the beam divergence is as small as 5 mrad. Due to the decreasing of the conversion efficiency as the decreasing of the target thickness, decreasing the beam divergence is the optimal choice to improve the yield of micro-spot gamma-ray in the experiment.
According to the simulations, electron beam with small divergence should be generated in the experiment first for the generation of micro-spot gamma-rays. Pure nitrogen is used to generate much higher plasma density and also for injection easily in the experiment. A gas jet with a diameter of 0.7 mm is used to generate electron beams with energy of tens of MeV, and the density profile is nearly Gaussian distribution (1 mm at FWHM). The measurement by interferometer shows that the molecular density can be changed between 1.8 × 10^{18} cm^{−3} and 2.86 × 10^{19} cm^{−3} for the back pressure of 100 kPa to 2000 kPa. The laser pulse with a diameter of 55 mm can be compressed to as short as about 24 fs (FWHM). By an off axis parabolic mirror with a focal length of about 333 mm (the f-number is about 6), the laser pulse can be focused to a spot size of about 6.9 μm (at 1/e^{2}), in which about 58% laser energy is contained. So, the peak intensity of the laser pulse is about 2.9 × 10^{19} W/cm^{2} when the laser energy on the target is about 0.8 J. As is analyzed in the laser wakefield acceleration [19,20], the smaller the laser spot size, the higher the plasma density and shorter the plasma length be needed to generate high quality electron beams. The electron beam profile is measured using a phosphor screen in the forward direction of the laser pulse, and its divergence has been optimized by changing the back pressure in the experiment, as shown in Fig. 3.
It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the beam divergence is about 85 mrad (FWHM) with the plasma density of 2.4 × 10^{20} cm^{−3} and is decreased to about 22 mrad and 5 mrad with the plasma density of 9.8 × 10^{19} cm^{−3} and 8.3 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}, respectively. With the decrease in the back pressure farther, the electron beam will be disappeared slowly. With the plasma density of 8.3 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}, the beam divergence can be controlled to about 5 mrad in most shots, and the total charge of the electron beam is between 100 pC and 130 pC. The energy spectrum of the generated small divergence electron beam is also shown in Fig. 3, in which a quasi-monoenergetic structure with peak energy of about 40 MeV appeared.
III. GENERATION OF THE MICRO-SPOT GAMMA-RAY
In the experiment, the micro-spot gamma-ray is generated by Bremsstrahlung radiation of the electron beam from a dense conversion target (tungsten). The distance between the gas jet and conversion target is fixed at 1 mm, and the target thickness is changed between 0.2 mm and 1 mm to find the optimal condition for micro-spot gamma-ray generation.
A. Spot size of the gamma-ray
Spot size is one of the most important properties of the gamma-ray, and it is measured by penumbral image with a tantalum pinhole drilled cylindrically (40 mm long and 1 mm inner diameter), which is designed by Monte Carlo simulation to confirm that the transmission of gamma-ray with energy of 10 MeV from the tantalum cylindrically is lower than 2 × 10^{−3}. The penumbral image is recorded by a stacked image plate (Fuji SR image plate), and the magnification of the imaging system is about 8. Before the gamma-ray penumbral image, the high energy electrons are deflected by a permanent magnet with 0.6 T and the penumbral imaging system is shielded by lead bricks from the secondary and scattering radiation. Figure 4 shows the penumbral image with a target thickness of 0.3 mm and a plasma density of 8.3 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}. By Fermi fitting of the penumbral image and giving the first-order derivative of the fitting result, the spot size of the gamma-ray can be achieved. The spot size is about 180 μm (FWHM) for the 0.3 mm target thickness.
Detailed experiments demonstrate that the spot size of the gamma-ray can be decreased by decreasing the target thickness, as shown in Fig. 5, which can be explained by the increasing scattering effect as the target thickness increases. When the target thickness is fixed, the spot size achieved by accumulating several shots is larger than that of only one shot, which is due to the electron beam pointing instability in the experiment. The electron beam pointing instability results in the position instability of the gamma-ray generation; both the position instability and the intrinsic spot size may attribute to the increasing of gamma-ray spot size in accumulating several shots. It is mentionable that the electron beam pointing instability is inevitable in the laser wakefield acceleration because of the nonlinear interaction of ultra-intense laser pulse and plasma. So, the spot size of the accumulated shots is much more useful in practice than that of the single shot.
When much more filters are placed before the penumbral image system to increase the energy threshold that can be detected, the spot size of the gamma-ray is further decreased. This is because of the fact that the gamma-ray distribution is much more concentrated for the much higher energy gamma-ray, which is determined by the energy distribution of the electron beam profile from the laser wakefield. When additional filters are placed, in which polymethyl methacrylate of 3 mm, aluminum of 0.05 mm, copper of 0.8 mm, and tantalum of 0.5 mm are contained, the spot size of the gamma-ray is only about 40 μm (FWHM) for its energy higher than 100 keV.
To sum up, with the decrease in the target thickness, the spot size of the gamma-ray is also decreased, and the spot size will be increased (but still smaller than 200 μm) with accumulative shots when electron beam pointing instability is considered. The spot size of the gamma-ray can be as small as 40 μm when its energy is higher than 100 keV.
B. The energy spectrum of the gamma-ray
The micro-spot gamma-ray driven by the laser wakefield is generated by Bremsstrahlung of electron beam from the dense conversion target, and its energy spectrum should be a quasi-Maxwellian or exponential distribution. The energy spectrum is measured usually by a filter stacked spectrometer (FSS), in which fourteen filters with different materials and thicknesses (as shown in Table I) are used and the energy between 0.01 and 10 MeV can be measured by this FSS [21]. The detector used by the filter stacked spectrometer is an image plate. The inset of Fig. 6(a) shows the raw signal intensity of each filter by the FSS for only one shot, and it can be seen that the signal intensity is decreased gradually and disappeared in the fourteenth filter. The energy spectrum of the gamma-ray can be achieved by solving these different signal intensities and also the transmission function of each filter.
Figure 6(a) is the energy spectrum of the gamma-ray achieved from the FSS. It shows that the spectrum distribution is quasi-Maxwellian or exponential, which can be expressed as N ∝ exp(E/kT), where E is the photon energy and kT is the fitting temperature. This fitting temperature is relative to the average energy of the gamma-ray and can be achieved by the exponential fitting of the energy spectra, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The temperature of the gamma-ray is between 5 MeV and 8 MeV for different conversion target thicknesses used in the experiment.
The yield of the gamma-ray per shot can be achieved by its energy spectrum and the energy response function of the image plate [22]. The yield per shot measured by one shot and the average of accumulative shots for the same conversion target is shown in Fig. 7. It can be found that the total yield is improved as the increasing of the conversion target thickness, and the yield per shot is between 10^{9} and 10^{10}. The maximum yield per shot is about 1.7 × 10^{10} photons, which is generated by the conversion target thickness of 1 mm, and the total yield of gamma-ray with energy higher than 1 MeV is about 9.1 × 10^{10} photons. The ablation of the target by the residual laser pulse can also generate gamma-ray; however, the distance between the focus and the conversion target is about 1 mm. At the position of the conversion target, the spot size is about 20 times larger (about 140 μm at 1/e^{2}) than that of the focus point without considering the laser plasma interaction, and the laser intensity is decreased to about 7 × 10^{17 }W/cm^{2}. When this laser interacts with the conversion target (i.e., the ablation of the solid target itself by the laser pulse), hot electrons with temperature of tens of keV can be generated by collisionless absorption [23,24], such as resonance absorption, relativistic J × B heating, and so on. Most of the gamma-rays generated from such hot electrons will be attenuated after the conversion target. So, the gamma-rays generated and measured in the experiment are mainly from the Bremsstrahlung of the electron beam but not the ablation of the conversion target by the residual laser pulse.
C. Spatial resolution of the gamma-ray
Resolution panel is usually used to test the spatial resolution of the gamma-ray; however, the most resolution panels are designed for gamma-ray energy lower than 100 keV and cannot satisfy the requirement of the gamma-ray driven by ultra-intense laser pulses. To test the spatial resolution of the MeV gamma-ray generated by ultra-intense laser pulse much more reliably, a new resolution test target is designed. The new resolution test target is made of stainless steel with different periodic structures, and the thickness of this test target is 10 mm. The spatial resolution of the gamma-ray for different conversion target thicknesses is tested by the modulation transfer function (MTF) of this new resolution test target. Different from the image plate, a charge-coupled device (CCD Quad-R0:4320) camera with a scintillator CsI (2-mm thickness) is used as the detector for the spatial resolution measurement [25].
Figure 8(a) shows the image of spatial resolution for the conversion target thickness of 1 mm and is imaged by the accumulation of ten consecutive shots. The periodic structure of 0.2 mm can be distinguished, but the contrast of the image is much lower. There are two main reasons that contribute to this weakened image, one is the much bigger spot size for the 1 mm conversion target thickness, and the other is the relative lower response efficiency of the CCD when the gain coefficient is minimum. Considering the weakened image of 1 mm converter, the gain coefficient of CCD is maximum for the 0.5 mm converter, and the contrast of the image is improved immediately, as shown in Fig. 8(b), which is also achieved by the accumulation of ten consecutive shots. The difference in the resolution test image between 1 mm conversion target and 0.5 mm conversion target is consistent with the different spot size revealed in Fig. 5.
Based on the resolution test image, the modulation transfer function of different conversion target thickness can be achieved, as shown in Fig. 9. The spatial resolution is better than 2.5 LP/mm for any conversion target thickness for the evaluation standard of 10% resolution limit, and it can be extended to 5 LP/mm or much higher. The spatial resolution for the 0.5 mm conversion target is better than that of the 1 mm conversion target, which is consistent with the spot size, as shown in Fig. 5.
D. High areal density radiography of the gamma-ray
The gamma-ray is often used in the radiography of areal density objects, and the micro-spot is one of the most outstanding property of the gamma-ray based on laser wakefield acceleration. In the demonstration of high-resolution radiography of the gamma-ray, a high areal density object with complex inner structures is usually used. The high areal density object used in our experiment is made of tungsten, similar to the object used in other experiments [4–7,12,13], and the diameter of this tungsten sphere is 20 mm; a stainless-steel block with different thicknesses is added before this object for much higher areal density radiography. There are two parts that attribute to the total areal density, tungsten sphere object and the stainless-steel block, and so the total areal density can be expressed as
where e_{W} is the maximum thickness of the object, which is 6 mm. e_{ss} and ρ_{ss} are the thickness and density of the stainless-steel block added before the object. μ_{ss}(E) and μ_{W}(E) are the absorption coefficients of stainless steel and tungsten for the gamma-ray energy of E. Tungsten sphere objects as well as stainless steel with different thicknesses are used in the experiment to generate different areal densities.
Figure 10 shows the radiography results with different areal densities. It can be found that the result is much clear for the tungsten sphere object (the stainless-steel thickness equivalent is about 1.5 cm), and the contrast of the radiography result is decreased but still can be distinguished when a 5 cm stainless steel block is added before the tungsten sphere object (the total stainless-steel thickness equivalent is about 6.5 cm).
IV. CONCLUSION
Based on the small divergence electron beam generated by laser wakefield acceleration, the micro-spot gamma-ray is generated, and the properties of this gamma-ray are measured and tested in detail experimentally. It shows that the spot size of this gamma-ray is always smaller than 200 μm, no matter the conversion target thickness, and can be as small as about 40 μm for its energy higher than 100 keV when the conversion target thickness of 0.2 mm is used. Besides the micro spot size, the spatial resolution of this gamma-ray is better than 2.5 LP/mm for the conversion target thickness of both 0.5 and 1 mm. The energy spectrum of this gamma-ray is quasi-Maxwellian or exponential distribution, and the fitting temperature is between 5 MeV and 8 MeV, and the maximum photon yield per shot of the gamma-ray can be up to 9.1 × 10^{9} photons (energy higher than 1 MeV). High-resolution radiography shows that the areal density of the gamma-ray radiographic image can be up to 51.3 g/cm^{2} (6.5 cm stainless steel thickness equivalent).
In contrast to the conventional gamma-ray generator (electron accelerator is usually used), smaller spot size and better spatial resolution are the main outstanding properties of gamma-ray driven by laser wakefield, and the gamma-ray (multi-MeV) with micro-spot (smaller than 100 μm) is achieved by this way. Such micro-spot gamma-ray can play an important role in the high-resolution radiography of high areal density objects (such as flash radiography and the computer tomography for non-destructive testing).
TABLE I. 
The filter parameters used in the FSS.
TABLE I. -body
No.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14
Filter	Ti	Cu	Mo	Ag	Pb	Ta	W	W	W	W	W	W	W	W
Thickness (μm)	129	111	131	178	130	213	414	1000	1700	4000	10 000	15 000	20 000	15 000
FIG. 1. 
The spot size and energy of electron beam used in different X/gamma-ray generators, in which Laboratoire d'Optique Appliquee represents the similar work in Ref [13].
FIG. 2. 
The relationship between the gamma-ray spot size and divergence of electron beam with different conversion target thicknesses.
FIG. 3. 
The divergence and energy spectrum of the electron beam. (a) 85 mrad with the plasma density of 2.4 × 10^{20} cm^{−3}. (b) 22 mrad with the plasma density of 9.8 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}. (c) 6 mrad with the plasma density of 8.3 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}. (d) Energy spectrum with the plasma density of 8.3 × 10^{19} cm^{−3}.
FIG. 4. 
The penumbral image of the gamma-ray and the calculated gamma-ray spot size.
FIG. 5. 
The gamma-ray spot size measured with different conversion target thicknesses.
FIG. 6. 
(a) The gamma-ray energy spectra with different target thicknesses. The inset of (a) show the raw images from FSS by one shot. (b) The fitting temperature of the gamma-ray energy spectra shown in (a) is relative to the average energy of the gamma-ray.
FIG. 7. 
The photon yield per shot measured by one shot (blue square) and the average of multi-shots (red circle); here, the yield is the integration of the photons with energy higher than 0.1 MeV.
FIG. 8. 
The gamma-ray image of the resolution panel for different conversion target thicknesses.
FIG. 9. 
The MTF of the gamma-ray image for different conversion target thicknesses.
FIG. 10. 
The gamma-ray radiography of different areal density objects.
