Fabrication of tunable diffraction grating by imprint lithography with photoresist mold
We fabricated a deformable transmission silicone [poly(dimethylsiloxane)] grating using a two-beam interference method and imprint lithography and evaluated its optical characteristics during a compression process. The grating pattern with 0.43 μm depth and 1.0 μm pitch was created on a silicone surface by an imprinting process with a photoresist mold to realize a simple, low-cost fabrication process. The first-order diffraction transmittance of this grating reached 10.3% at 632.8 nm wavelength. We also measured the relationship between the grating period and compressive stress to the fabricated elements. The grating period changed from 1.0 μm to 0.84 μm by 16.6% compression of the fabricated element in one direction, perpendicular to the grooves, and the first-order diffraction transmittance was 8.6%.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of optical devices depends greatly on the properties of the employed material. Silicone ([SiO(CH_{3})_{2}]_{n}, polydimethylsiloxane), an inert polymer, is an interesting material with widely diverse scientific and technological applications because it is transparent in the visible range, nontoxic, commercially available, inexpensive, chemically stable, and elastic [1–4]. Therefore, it is anticipated for use as a new material for optical devices with the micro- and nano-structures. Moreover, the silicone elastomer enables the fabrication of controllable optical elements that are easily tailored for a specific application at a minimal cost because the silicone elastomer with a desired shape can be formed by low-temperature molding. This material is useful in realizing the mechanical or electrical control of a periodic structure in optical devices. Tunable optical devices, e.g., a lens [5–7], waveplate [8], waveguide [9,10], laser [11–14], and grating [15–21] have been developed recently by using silicone elastomers.
Imprint lithography has attracted much attention for use in the fabrication of optical devices with nano- and micro-structures because this method is proven as an efficient nanostructure duplication technology with high throughput, good fidelity, and low cost. Some researchers have examined the formation of devices upon the silicone elastomer, resin, or glasses using an imprinting process [22–29]. However, the transmission silicone diffraction grating with high aspect ratio (the ratio of the grating depth and width) and narrower pitch (∼1 μm) has not been fabricated using an imprinting process yet. Therefore, there was no report on the relation of silicone grating depths and diffraction efficiencies. In addition, tunable diffraction gratings with optofluidic devices have been fabricated by some researchers [30,31]. However, when these elements are used as diffraction elements, it is difficult to handle because they use liquid.
In a previous study, we fabricated the transmissive diffraction grating with ∼3 μm pitch and 1.2 μm grating depth by imprinting onto the silicone elastomer using a silicon carbide (SiC) mold as a master mold and examined the change of the grating pitch, which corresponds to the diffraction angle, against compression. However, the first-order diffraction transmittances at 632.8 nm wavelength were very low (∼0.5%) because of unsuitable grating depth [32]. The performance of the diffraction grating is determined by the diffraction efficiency, and it is known that the grating depth affects the diffraction efficiency strongly [33]. The fabrication of a grating with adequate aspect ratio was difficult since we conducted two steps of imprinting processes in the sample fabrication, which consist of imprinting on a photopolymer using a SiC mold and imprinting on silicone using the fabricated photopolymer mold. In addition, the fabrication of SiC mold requires a microfabrication method, such as reactive ion etching (RIE) equipment. This method is undesirable as it is complicated, time-consuming, and requires expensive equipment.
For this study, in order to realize a simpler and lower cost fabrication process and to obtain large diffraction angle and to obtain tunable gratings with larger diffraction angle and the higher first-order diffraction efficiency, a silicone grating with narrower pitch and adequate aspect ratio was fabricated by a direct imprinting process from a photoresist grating mold patterned by a two-beam interference method onto a silicone elastomer. This process does not require the expensive equipment mentioned above. Also, we examined the relation between the grating period and deformation by compression of the direction perpendicular to the grating axis and also observed the diffraction transmittance.
II. FABRICATION OF SILICONE GRATING
Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram for the fabrication process of a grating on the silicone resin. We formed the photoresist gratings on glass substrates using a two-beam interference method. A photoresist was coated onto the glass substrate and was exposed by the two-beam interference method by using a He-Cd laser beam with a wavelength of 325 nm and a power of around 40 mW (KIMMON KOHA, IK3401R-F) for generating a submicrometer-pitch grating structure. After the exposed photoresist was developed, the grating period is found by
where λ stands for the wavelength of the He-Cd laser and θ denotes the angle of the beam incident on the photoresist film. It is possible to control the period of the fringe by changing the incident angle θ of the two beams. Therefore, photoresist gratings can be fabricated with various periods in the two-beam interference system. The grating period Λ of these elements was 1.0 μm. We controlled the grating depth of the grating by changing the exposure time. To fabricate a silicone grating, a room-temperature curable silicone elastomer (Shin-Etsu, KE-103) was used because of its high transparency, chemical stability, and sufficient elasticity. This elastomer can be cured by mixing 5% curing agent carefully to the raw liquid. The mixture was poured onto the fabricated photoresist grating mold, which consisted of the fabricated grating with 1.0 μm period. After placing it at room-temperature for 3 days, the molded grating was peeled off from the photoresist grating mold [34].
Figures 2–9 show the top and cross-sectional images of photoresist gratings and silicone gratings. The silicone gratings shown in Figs. 3, 5, 7, and 9 were fabricated using the photoresist gratings shown in Figs. 2, 4, 6, and 8 as a mold, respectively. All of the silicone gratings obtained a grating period of 1.0 μm by transferring the photoresist mold pattern. However, after imprinting, there were decreases of the grating depths from 0.14 μm (Fig. 2) to 0.13 μm (Fig. 3), 0.23 μm (Fig. 4) to 0.22 μm (Fig. 5), 0.45 μm (Fig. 6) to 0.43 μm (Fig. 7), and 0.67 μm (Fig. 8) to 0.58 μm (Fig. 9). The transfer rates (the ratio of the silicone grating depth and the photoresist grating depth) were 93% (Figs. 2 and 3), 95% (Figs. 4 and 5), 95% (Figs. 6 and 7), and 87% (Figs. 8 and 9). On the other hand, regarding the sample imprinted using the photoresist grating mold shown in Fig. 5, adjacent gratings come into contact as shown in the dotted circle in Fig. 9, and the grating structure could not be obtained uniformly although grids with high aspect were formed locally.
III. OPTICAL EVALUATION
We measured the zeroth- and first-order diffraction transmittances for the fabricated elements shown in Fig. 3 (the grating depth: 0.13 μm), Fig. 5 (0.22 μm), and Fig. 7 (0.43 μm) using a He-Ne laser (632.8 nm wavelength) and a power meter. The polarization perpendicular to the grating axis was employed in this experiment since polarization dependence could hardly be confirmed in the previous experiment [32]. Figure 10 shows the diffraction pattern of the He-Ne laser for the fabricated silicone grating, and Table I shows the relation of the diffraction transmittance at 632.8 nm wavelength and the grating depth of the elements.
The intensity ratio of the first-order diffraction spot against the zeroth-order diffraction spot increased with an increment of the grating depth as shown in Fig. 10. The transmittance of the grating with 0.13 μm depth was 1.5%, those of the gratings with 0.22 μm and 0.43 μm depths were 3.1% and 10.3%, respectively. On the other hand, the zeroth-order transmittance decreased from 88.1% to 60.3% with the grating depth, as shown in Table I. Also, second-order diffraction light was not observed.
Next, we measured the grating pitch of the fabricated silicone grating against compression ratio. The element with 0.43 μm depth presented in Fig. 8 was employed as a sample. The grating period of the fabricated element was evaluated from the measured diffraction angle by using
where m is the diffraction order, λ is the laser beam wavelength (632.8 nm), θ is the measured diffraction angles, and Λ is the grating periods.
The deformation effect was studied by compressing the sample sides with a micrometer. The fabricated silicone grating was mounted on a clamp holder and the clamp holder was attached to a screw mechanism. When that was turned manually, the silicone grating was compressed in one direction. In the current experiment, the silicone grating was pressed in the direction perpendicular to the grating axis. The sample size was adjusted to around 3.50 × 5.75 × 17.65 mm^{3} to deform the fabricated grating as shown in Fig. 11. The grating pitches were measured for each compression rate [the ratio of the amount of change in the sample width and the sample width (5.75 mm)]. The pitch of each grating was calculated using Eq. (2). The element was compressed from both sides using a micrometer; i.e., the fabricated sample was deformed from 5.75 to 4.80 mm width, and hence, the maximum compressing ratio was 16.6% because the width of the beam spot widened under more than 17% strain and the measurement of diffraction angle becomes difficult. Figure 12 presents the relations between compression ratio and the grating period of the silicone grating shown in Fig. 7. The theoretical dotted line in Fig. 12 is a value obtained by multiplying the grating period by the compression ratio. As the compression increased, the grating period reduced as shown in Fig. 12. Figure 13 shows the observed diffraction pattern (a) without compression and (b) with 16.6% compression. As a result, the grating period changed from 1.0 (measured diffraction angle; θ_{1} = 39°) to 0.84 μm (θ_{2} = 48°) under 16.6% strain. Results show that the grating period change was 0.16 μm. The grating period Λ decreased with compression and the diffraction angle θ increased. As a result, it has been confirmed that it correlates with Eq. (2).
We also evaluated the transmittances of the zeroth- and first-order diffraction spots for each compression ratio. Figure 14 shows the relation between the compression ratio and the zeroth-order and first-order diffraction transmittances. As shown in Fig. 14, regarding the first-order diffraction, transmittances decreased from 10.2% to 8.6% by 16.6% compression, and the first-order diffraction transmittance tended to decrease with an increment of the compression. The width of the beam spot widened around twice as wide as that one before compressing, as shown in Fig. 13. On the other hand, the zeroth-order diffraction transmittances increased from 69.0% to 72.9%.
IV. DISCUSSION
The silicone gratings with the depth of 0.13 μm, 0.22 μm, and 0.43 μm could be obtained by an imprinting process using a photoresist mold. The diffraction grating with 0.43 μm obtained the much higher diffraction transmittance than that of the previous result (0.5%), as shown in Fig. 10 and Table I [32]. Also, the first-order diffraction transmittance of the grating with 0.43 μm depth was more than three times that of the grating with 0.22 depth, and it was confirmed that the grating depth affects the diffraction efficiency, theoretically [33].
As the fabricated elements are pressed up to 16.6% compression, the angle of first-order diffraction increases and the period shrunk from 1.0 to 0.83 μm. As a result of observation of the period of the grating up to 16.6% compression, the values calculated using Eq. (2) correspond almost well to these values as shown in Fig. 12. In a previous study, the silicone grating period changed from 3.02 to 2.86 μm under 9.2% strain (the grating period change: 0.16 μm) [32]. By contrast, it changed from 1.0 to 0.84 μm without large expansion of the beam spot, despite 16.6% compression. We guess that this increment of the compression ratio was made possible by suppressing deformation of the element by narrowing the width of the element to 5.75 mm.
As portrayed in Fig. 13, the beam spot of the first-order diffraction expanded with compression compared with that of no compression. The deformation of the beam spot seems to result from convex distortion. This expansion of the spot is due to the lens effect of the convex distortion of the silicone grating. The transmittance of the first-order diffraction light decreased slightly with an increment of the compression ratio as portrayed in Fig. 14. This reduction also seems to result from this non-uniformity of the period and the lens effect of the convex distortion because of distortion, and the limit of compression ratio is ∼17% because the beam spot widely spread as shown in Fig. 13. Also, we guess that the slight disagreement between the theoretical value and experimental value shown in Fig. 14 indicates that deformation of the grating due to compression prevented the period from decreasing.
In the case of imprinting onto silicone using the photoresist grating with adequate aspect ratio, adjacent gratings came into contact as shown in Fig. 9, and non-uniformity of the grating structure was formed on the element. Consequently the uniform grating structure could not be fabricated. Therefore, we infer that the fabrication of the silicone gratings with high aspect (over one) is difficult according to this experiment result. Additionally, the reason why the efficiency of printed grating is lower than that of other samples is presumed to be because silicone did not fill photoresist grating because of the high grating depth.
Based on the SEM images presented in Figs. 3, 5, and 7, we calculated the diffraction efficiencies of the model shown in Table III using the rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) theory [35,36]. The profile of the gratings was approximated by three stacked lamellae as illustrated in Figs. 6–8. The geometrical parameters of this model were a period of Λ = 1 μm. These values used for the calculation are decided based on the SEM images presented in Figs. 3, 5, and 7 and are shown in Fig. 15 and Table II. As shown in Fig. 15 and Table II, a silicone grating depth and widths of three stacked lamellae w_{i} (i = 1, 2, 3) are the defining variable parameters of this model. We used the polarization perpendicular to the grating axis in the simulation. The calculated values of diffraction efficiencies are summarized in Table III. Table III shows the values calculated under the condition that the refractive index of silicone is 1.40 [14]. Regarding both the zeroth- and first-order diffraction beams, the experimental values were lower than the calculated one. We infer that this slight period nonuniformity and the surface roughness made lower diffraction transmittances than the theoretical values.
In addition, we calculated the relation of the diffraction efficiencies for 632.8 nm wavelength and the silicone grating depth or the period using the RCWA. For this calculation, the cross section of the grating was assumed to be rectangular. The grating period and fill factor of the silicone grating were assumed to be 1 μm and 0.5, respectively. Figure 16 shows the calculation result. As shown in Fig. 16(a), the first diffraction efficiency increased with the grating depth to 0.78 μm. Similarly, the efficiency for the grating period of 0.8-1 μm was also calculated. The depth d and fill factor f were assumed to be 0.5 μm and 0.5, respectively. As a result, large fluctuation was not observed and it was almost correlated with the experimental value as shown in Figs. 14 and 16(b).
V. CONCLUSIONS
We fabricated a tunable transmission grating with 1.0 μm period and 0.43 μm depth by a direct molding process onto a silicone elastomer using the photoresist mold. The first-order diffraction transmittance of this silicone grating reached 10.3% at 632.8 nm wavelength. In addition to obtaining higher resolution (narrower grating period) than the previous element, this value is about 20 times that of the previous result [32]. We also examined the relation between the grating period or the diffraction transmittance and compressive stress to this silicone grating. Consequently, the period 1.0 μm was changed to 0.84 μm by 16.6% compression of the fabricated element in one direction, perpendicular to the grooves. The first-order diffraction transmittance decreased to 8.6% because of the grating distortion.
The current experiment verified that molding on silicone using a photoresist mold was useful for simplification and cost reduction. In addition, this tunable grating appears to be useful to construct a compact spectrometer for in situ measurements. In a future study, we will fabricate the gratings using harder silicone materials to form the gratings with higher aspect ratio for higher first-order diffraction transmittance. In addition, this tunable grating appears to be useful in constructing a compact spectrometer for in situ measurements which requires strong first-order diffraction light.
TABLE I. 
Relation of the grating depth and transmittance of the diffraction spot at 632.8 nm wavelength.
TABLE II. 
Grating depth and widths of the calculation models.
TABLE III. 
Calculation results of the diffraction efficiency.
TABLE I. -body
	Transmittance (%)
Grating depth (μm)	Zeroth order	First order
0.13	88.1	1.5
0.22	80.7	3.1
0.43	60.3	10.3
TABLE II. -body
d (μm)	w_{1} (μm)	w_{2} (μm)	w_{3} (μm)
0.13	0.21	0.35	0.50
0.22	0.36	0.57	0.78
0.43	0.24	0.46	0.68
TABLE III. -body
	Diffraction efficiency (%)
Grating depth (μm)	Zeroth order	First order
0.13	91.7	2.5
0.22	85.0	5.4
0.43	57.5	19.0
FIG. 1. 
Schematic depiction of the silicone grating fabrication process. (a) After a photoresist is coated on a substrate by spin coating, the He-Cd laser beam is irradiated by the two-beam interference exposure system. (b) A photoresist grating is formed by development. (c) Silicone is prepared by mixing 5% curing agent to the raw liquid. (d) The mixture was poured onto the fabricated photoresist grating mold. (e) The silicone grating is peeled off from the photoresist mold.
FIG. 2. 
Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoresist mold with a grating depth of 0.14 μm.
FIG. 3. 
Optical micrograph of the silicone grating replicated from the photoresist mold shown in Fig. 2.
FIG. 4. 
Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoresist mold with a grating depth of 0.23 μm.
FIG. 5. 
Optical micrograph of the silicone grating replicated from the photoresist mold shown in Fig. 4.
FIG. 6. 
Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoresist mold with a grating depth of 0.45 μm.
FIG. 7. 
Optical micrograph of the silicone grating replicated from the photoresist mold shown in Fig. 6.
FIG. 8. 
Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoresist mold with a grating depth of 0.67 μm.
FIG. 9. 
Optical micrograph of the silicone grating replicated from the photoresist mold shown in Fig. 8. (a) Top view. (b) Cross-sectional view. The dotted circles show that adjacent gratings come into contact.
FIG. 10. 
Diffraction patterns of the fabricated silicone gratings using a He-Ne laser: the grating depths are (a) 0.13 μm, (b) 0.22 μm, and (c) 0.43 μm.
FIG. 11. 
Measurement image of transmittances of the diffraction spots of the fabricated silicone grating.
FIG. 12. 
Relation of compression ratio and the grating period.
FIG. 13. 
Diffraction patterns of the fabricated silicone gratings using a He-Ne laser: (a) without and (b) with 16.6% compression.
FIG. 14. 
Relation of the diffraction transmittance of the zeroth and first order and the compression rate onto the silicone grating.
FIG. 15. 
Simulation model.
FIG. 16. 
Relation of (a) the silicone grating depth (period: 1 μm) or (b) the period (depth: 0.5 μm) and the diffraction efficiency calculated by RCWA. Black and dashed curves show the diffraction efficiencies of the first and zeroth order, respectively. The cross section of the grating was assumed to be rectangular and f = 0.5.
