Influence of inner-arc curvature and number of cladding rings on confinement loss in a hypocycloid-shaped kagome hollow-core photonic crystal fiber
A hypocycloid-shaped hollow-core photonic crystal fiber is proposed and investigated numerically, taking account of the inhibited coupling mechanism for light guidance. The results show that the curvature of the internal arcs surrounding the core has a very significant impact on the confinement loss, whereas the number of cladding rings has only a weak influence. For an arc curvature of 1 with three cladding rings, a confinement loss of just ∼10 dB/km can be achieved for a bandwidth of 1000 nm covering the range from 1 to 2 μm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Hollow-core photonic crystal fibers (HC-PCFs) consist of a light-guiding central hollow core surrounded by a triangular lattice arrangement of micrometer-scale silica capillaries. If the refractive index of the cladding is higher than that of the core, the fiber possesses a two-dimensional light-guided photonic band gap (PBG), as a consequence of which light within a certain frequency range will be confined to the central fiber core. Such hollow-core photonic band gap fibers (HC-PBGFs) were first produced by Cregan et_al [1] in 1999, and have subsequently been used in a number of applications, such as gas sensing [2], gas-based nonlinear fiber optics [3], optical communication [4], generation of optical solitons [5], high-power lasers [6], and generation of optical-frequency combs [7]. In 2002, Benabid et_al [8] proposed a hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF whose increased gas-filling ratio and optimized lattice constants gave an enhanced nonlinear performance compared with HC-PBGFs.
A hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF is a type of kagome PCF, with the guidance mechanism being provided by inhibited coupling [9]. It has lower losses and a broader bandwidth compared with an HC-PBGF, although changes in structural parameters resulting from the broad bandwidth can lead to red and blue shifts. In a kagome PCF, the ultralow losses over a broad bandwidth [10] can be explained by coupling between the core mode and the cladding mode [11]. Compared with HC-PBGFs, kagome PCFs have a much wider range of applications, including high-power broadband transmission [12], generation of supercontinuum spectra [13], pulse compression [14] and self-compression [15], ultraviolet [16] and visible [17] light generation, mid-infrared transmission [18], terahertz wave generation [19], and optical-frequency comb generation [20]. For one kagome PCF, Bradley et_al [21] reported a record-breaking low loss of ∼70 dB/km over a spectral range of 1000 nm. Wang et_al [22] proposed a seven-cell core and three-ring-cladding large-pitch kagome PCF. Benoit et_al [23] proposed a single-mode terahertz waveguide. Debord et_al [24] reported the generation of Raman combs more than five octaves wide using a high-power picosecond laser.
In this paper, a hypocycloid-shaped kagome PCF is designed and analyzed using a commercial mode solver. The effects of arc curvature and cladding rings on the confinement loss are investigated by means of the finite element method (FEM) [25]. As in the previous studies by Alharbi et_al [26] and Fan et_al [27], the core size is kept constant. However, in our design, the strut thickness and the diameter of the kagome PCF are fixed. The numerical results demonstrate that the confinement loss is strongly influenced by an increase in the internal arc curvature, which is mainly attributed to the hypocycloid-shaped fiber core. However, the cladding of the kagome PCF has little effect on the confinement loss. Thus, it is essential that the internal arc curvature be strictly controlled during the fabrication of the fiber.
II. GEOMETRICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND THEORY
Figure 1(a) shows the cross section of a typical hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF. The hypocycloid-shaped core contour is achieved by removing seven kagome tubes to give a hexagonal arrangement. The pitch of the kagome tubes is 10 μm. The fiber core boundary of the kagome PCF is composed of two kinds of hypocycloid-shaped arcs. The inner and outer circles, with radii R_{in} and R_{out}, respectively, are each tangent to two symmetrical types of internal arcs. The hypocycloid-shaped core is surrounded by three layers of cells of silica kagome tubes. The space strut thickness t is 500 nm. The refractive index of air is taken as 1. Due to this particular structural design, a very high gas-filling ratio can be achieved in the kagome PCF. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the parameter controlling the arc curvature is defined as b = d/r, where d is the distance from the top of an internal arc to its maximum chord and r is the semi-chord length. With this definition, the hypocycloid-shaped kagome HC-PCF has a “quasi-circular” form for b = 0. When b = 1, the core contour is surrounded by a boundary consisting of semicircular arcs. When 0 < b < 1 or b > 1, the core contour is surrounded by elliptical internal arcs. The outer boundary arcs are taken to be circular. In the simulations, the dispersion by the silica material is calculated using the Sellmeier equation [28].
As a well-defined optical parameter, the confinement loss represents a well-defined optical parameter for measuring the transmission performance of a kagome PCF. The confinement loss characteristics of kagome PCFs are of great importance for their application in high-power ultrafast optical systems. The high transmission efficiency and gas-filling ratios of kagome PCFs are also responsible for their successful application in studies of ultrafast nonlinear optical phenomena and in pulse shaping in high-power systems. When an ultrafast laser is used with a kagome PCF, the laser's operating wavelength should be selected to lie in the ultralow-confinement-loss region of the PCF.
In this paper, the confinement loss of the kagome PCF is determined using a commercial mode solver based on the FEM, with a perfect matched layer (PML) being used to represent the anisotropic outer layer of the PCF. The confinement loss is given by the following formula [29,30]:
where λ is the operating wavelength and Im[n_{eff}] is the imaginary part of the refractive index. Figure 2 shows the dependence of the waveguide dispersion and the confinement loss on wavelength for an arc curvature b = 1 and three cladding rings. It can be seen that the dispersion decreases with increasing wavelength and that there is phase matching between the core mode and the cladding strut mode at wavelengths of 950 and 1030 nm. When this phase matching occurs, it is possible to achieve resonant coupling between the core mode and the cladding strut mode. The energy of the core mode is reflected to the cladding, generating the cladding strut mode, while the fundamental mode is cut off at the corresponding wavelengths of 950 and 1030 nm. When phase matching cannot be achieved between the core mode and the cladding strut mode, the energy will be limited to the core of the kagome PCF. For a given kagome PCF, the loss spectrum exhibits a broadband high-loss feature in the resonance wavelength region. Resonance between the fiber core mode and the cladding mode can be obtained at a wavelength λ_{i} given by
where i is an integer, t is the thickness of the kagome tubes, which is assumed to be constant throughout the structure, and n_{g} is the refractive index of the silica glass material of the cladding. A large proportion of the cladding is filled with air. The refractive index of the hollow core is very close to that of the cladding. Owing to the presence of a large number of corners in the structure of the cladding, the spectrum of confinement loss exhibits significant oscillations. These can be attributed to Fano resonance [31].
Figure 3 shows the mode profiles of the kagome PCF for different numbers of cladding rings and different arc curvatures at a wavelength of 1550 nm. Figure 4 shows the corresponding variations of the normalized electric field intensity with distance. As can be seen, for a given number of cladding rings, there is a strong decrease in the mode field as the arc curvature b increases from 0 to 1. However, for a given arc curvature, the mode field changes only slightly as the number of cladding rings increases from one to three. In short, it is clear that the light energy can be efficiently confined to the core of the kagome PCF at a wavelength of 1550 nm.
III. DEPENDENCE OF CONFINEMENT LOSS ON ARC CURVATURE AND NUMBER OF CLADDING RINGS
Figure 5 shows the variations of the dispersion and confinement loss as the arc curvature b increases from 0 to 1 in the case of a single cladding ring. The black, red, and green lines indicate the dispersion relation and confinement loss corresponding to arc curvatures of b = 0, 0.5, and 1, respectively. The confinement loss is higher for wavelengths from 800 to 1000 nm than for wavelengths from 1000 to 2000 nm, since the conditions for inhibited coupling can be met in the latter range, whereas resonant coupling between the core mode and the cladding strut mode occurs for wavelengths between 800 and 1000 nm. The vertical dashed lines indicate the cutoff wavelengths for b = 0 at 960, 1030, 1138, and 1227 nm. The cutoff wavelengths for b = 0.5 are 790, 930, and 1000 nm, and those for b = 1 are 960 and 1030 nm. At these wavelengths, resonance occurs between the core mode and the cladding strut mode, leading to a jump in the effective refractive index.
Figure 6 shows the variations of the dispersion and confinement loss with arc curvature when there are two cladding rings. The effective refractive index decreases significantly with increasing arc curvature. The confinement loss also exhibits a clear decreasing trend with increasing arc curvature. The confinement loss spectrum for b = 0.5 decreases only slightly compared with that for b = 1, owing to the similar core structures in these two cases. From Fig. 6, it can be seen that the peak confinement loss occurs at the resonance wavelengths, where the energy of the core is transferred to the cladding of the kagome PCF. The resonance wavelengths for b = 0 are 970, 1008, 1139, and 1227 nm, while those for b = 0.5 are 930, 1000, and 1008 nm and those for b = 1 are 930 and 1008 nm.
We now turn to the transmission characteristics of a hypocycloid-shaped kagome PCF with three cladding rings. Figure 7 shows the variations of the dispersion and confinement loss as the arc curvature increases from b = 0 to b = 1. It can be seen that both the dispersion and confinement loss show a strong dependence on the arc curvature. In particular, the confinement loss exhibits a clearly decreasing trend. Thus, for a hypocycloid-shaped kagome PCF with three cladding rings, ultralow broadband losses can be achieved by increasing the arc curvature. As indicated in Fig. 7, the resonance wavelengths for b = 0 are 970, 1034, 1151, and 1223 nm. The resonance wavelengths for b = 0.5 are 970 and 1007 nm, while those for b = 1 are 950 and 1007 nm.
Figure 8 shows the confinement loss spectra of the hypocycloid-shaped kagome PCF for different numbers of cladding rings and different arc curvatures. For an arc curvature b = 1 [Fig. 8(a)], the initial trend of the confinement loss spectrum is an increase toward a peak. There is then a gradual downhill trend to the lowest point at a wavelength of 1550 μm. The confinement loss exhibits a generally decreasing trend as the number of cladding rings increases from 1 to 3. For b = 0.5 [Fig. 8(b)], there is a very significant high-loss region due to resonance between the core mode and the cladding strut mode. For b = 1 [Fig. 8(c)], there is again a strong resonance between the core mode and the cladding strut mode, although low confinement losses can be obtained over a broadband region from 1 to 2 μm. For all three values of the arc curvature, the confinement loss can be significantly reduced by increasing the number of cladding rings from one to three. As shown in Fig. 8, the energy can be completely confined to the fiber core when there are three cladding rings in the kagome PCF.
IV. CONCLUSION
The effects of arc curvatures and the number of cladding rings on confinement loss for a proposed hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF have been numerically investigated using the FEM, taking account of the influence of the inhibited coupling mechanism on the propagation characteristics of the PCF. Resonant coupling between the core mode and the cladding strut mode can occur when a phase matching condition is met. The confinement loss from the core can be greatly reduced and a cutoff wavelength band can be obtained in the resonance region. The weak interaction between the core mode and the cladding strut mode will be enhanced by the inhibited coupling mechanism, allowing highly efficient transmission of energy in the fiber core. The low broadband loss of the proposed hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF can be achieved at a wavelength of about 1000 nm for an arc curvature b = 1 and three cladding rings.
FIG. 1. 
(a) Cross-section of the hypocycloid-shaped kagome PCF. (b) Definition of the curvature of the core boundary arcs. R_{in} and R_{out} are the radii of the inner and outer circles, respectively.
FIG. 2. 
Dispersion relation and confinement loss of the hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF with three cladding rings and an arc curvature b = 1. The insets show the energy distributions at wavelengths of 950 and 1550 nm.
FIG. 3. 
Mode profiles of the hypocycloid-shaped HC-PCF for different numbers of cladding rings and different arc curvatures at a wavelength of 1550 nm.
FIG. 4. 
Variation of normalized electric field intensity with distance for different numbers of cladding rings and different arc curvatures at a wavelength of 1550 nm.
FIG. 5. 
Variations of the dispersion and confinement loss with arc curvature for a single cladding ring.
FIG. 6. 
Variations of dispersion and confinement loss with arc curvature for two cladding rings.
FIG. 7. 
Variations of dispersion and confinement loss with arc curvature for three cladding rings.
FIG. 8. 
Dependence of the confinement loss on the number of cladding rings for arc curvatures of (a) b = 0, (b) b = 0.5, and (c) b = 1.
