A torsional sub-milli-Newton thrust balance based on a spring leaf strain gauge sensor
The development of a torsional thrust balance with a spring leaf sensor based on strain gauges is described in the present work. The balance is capable of measuring thrust forces up to 225 mN with micro-Newton resolution. Steady state thrust force is hereby measured via displacement of the balance arm, which in return leads to a displacement of the sensor. The strain induced by the force on the flexure member of the sensor is measured using strain gauges. The development of the sensor and the dynamic behavior of the balance are based on analytical analysis. The oscillatory motion of the balance arm is damped by a passive eddy current damper. An automated calibration mechanism with a pulley and calibration weights is used to calibrate the balance prior to measurement. Atmospheric as well as in situ calibration, single and multiple calibration runs with automatic averaging of calibration coefficients, is possible at all operational stages. The calibration of the balance exhibits excellent linearity and repeatability, while the dynamic behavior shows some deviations from the analytical prediction. The sensor exhibits low noise, with an estimated resolution within 15 μN. A state-of-the-art ratio of resolution to measurement range is achieved. As a conclusion, a series of thrust measurements in the range of 29 μN–37.04 mN are presented and briefly discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of electric propulsion systems (EPS) for spacecraft applications demands for precise measurement of thrust to develop high efficiency devices. To experimentally measure thrust of EPS, thrust balances are used and commonly designed to fit the special requirements of the laboratory infrastructure and thruster physical properties.
The thrust is either measured by the displacement of mechanical members of the balance or by the compensation of the applied load to achieve zero displacement. The zero-type approach is far more complex since closed style feedback loops and additional sensing and actuating components have to be integrated in the balance design [1–5]. For steady state thrust measurement, balances which are based on temporal displacement are far more prevalent. The three basic balance configurations, described in the literature over the past years, are the hanging pendulum [6–9], the inverted pendulum [4,10,11], and the torsional pendulum [12–18].
For each of the basic configurations, several variations are described, with applied counterweights [18], double [19] and triple [2] configurations of the pendulum arm, as well as complex mechanical designs with sets of mechanical linkages [6,9] to increase the balance arm deflection.
The hanging pendulum configuration naturally exhibits a high load capacity and good stability; however, sensitivity is reduced by the restoring effect of the gravitational force. To achieve precise measurement of small thrust, the pendulum arm length may have to be increased, or counterweights have to be used, which could be problematic in smaller vacuum facilities.
The inverted pendulum configuration offers high sensitivity but with the cost of stability since the gravitational force has to be counteracted by the restoring moment of the balance. In addition, the inverted pendulum is more prone to vibrational disturbances caused by the pumps of the vacuum system.
The torsional balance design offers the basic advantage of separating the thruster’s gravitational force and the generated thrust since the balance arm rotates in a horizontal motion. If the balance is leveled properly, it offers in comparison the highest sensitivity with low vulnerability to vibrational disturbances, making the torsional concept an ideal candidate for low thrust measurements.
Thrust balances have been designed for all kinds of thrusts, from nano- [13] and micro-Newton [1,12,14,19,20] to milli-Newton [6,9,11] and Newton [2,6,9,16] range, dependent on the demanded specific thrust. To determine the sensitivity and resolution of a balance, the calibration mechanism and the sensors used to measure the displacement are the most important components that have to be engineered in a balance set-up. While for the calibration of a balance, the usage of calibration weights is by far the most dominant technique, able to calibrate balances down to the micro-Newton range [13], a variety of sensors is used in balance set-ups. Thrust balances have been designed, e.g., using optical [8,17,20,21] and interferometer [19,22] based sensors, as well as linear variable differential transformer [4,12,15,23] (LVDT) or linear gap displacement transducer [6] (LGDT) sensors. Another sensor technology are strain gauges, which have successfully been applied by Stephen et_al [24,25] to measure thrust in the range of milli-Newtons.
In the present work, the design and development of a torsional thrust balance and a sensor is described. The sensor, which is based on the principle of a spring leaf with applied strain gauges, exhibits excellent linearity and repeatability. The balance was originally designed to measure thrust forces up to 125 mN with a sub-milli-Newton resolution. However, with the extended capabilities of the sensor, thrust forces up to 225 mN can be reliably measured. Results for calibration and dynamic balance behavior and results for a series of thrust measurements in the range of 29 μN–37.04 mN are presented.
II. EXPERIMANTAL FACILITY
A. The test facility
Testing, calibration, and measurement of the thrust balance were performed in the large vacuum facility at the Center of Applied Space Technology and Microgravity (ZARM). A schematic of the facility is shown in Fig. 1. The vacuum chamber has dimensions of 1.9 m in diameter and 2.8 m in height enclosing a total volume of approximately 8 m^{3}. Attached to the chamber is a pumping unit consisting of two Leybold rotary pumps type D16B and D65B, a Leybold roots pump type WAU501, and two Leybold turbo molecular pumps type TURBOVAC 361 and TURBOVAC 1000. Control of the unit is realized by a programmable logic controller terminal. Running the turbo molecular pumps, background pressures below 10^{−2} Pa without load can be reached. For the experimental data presented in this paper, the turbo molecular pumps were deactivated, which results in background pressures below 2 Pa without load (in situ), while under load up to 25 Pa are present.
B. The INGA IV arcjet thruster
Final thrust measurements are carried out on the 4th generation of the Ionized Noble Gas Accelerator (INGA) arcjet thruster presented in Fig. 2. The arcjet thruster is developed, built, and operated at ZARM.
The thruster body made of stainless steel is enclosing the sintered boron nitride insulators, a tungsten de Laval nozzle acting as an anode, and a tungsten cathode. The mass flow entering the thruster is controlled by using two thermal mass flowmeters, models FG-201CV-ABD-33-V-DA-A1V and F-111B-ABD-33-V (in case two: separate valve, type F-004AC-LUU-33-V), from Bronkhorst.
III. THRUST BALANCE DESIGN
A. Mechanical balance mechanism
The mechanical concept of the developed thrust balance is based on a torsional, counterweighted pendulum. A full overview of the balance is shown in Fig. 3(a). The main components are the pendulum arm with counterweights, a central housing incorporating flexure pivot bearings, mountings for the support structure, a passive eddy current damper, the calibration mechanism, and the developed strain gauge based force sensor. On one end of the pendulum arm, the previously described INGA IV thruster can be seen. Main parts, like the housing and the pendulum arm, are made of aluminum (EN AW-6060). The material was chosen due to its high rigidity and lightweight properties to optimize oscillational behavior. Temperature effects are taken care of by symmetrical construction and an insulating stainless steel framework structure to reduce thermal stress on the arm.
For the balance’s bearing F-20 flexure, pivots from C-Flex Bearing Co., Inc. are chosen. Each flexure pivot is capable of withstanding loads of 502.65 N in the axial direction resulting in a total axial load capacity of the balance of 1005.30 N (≈102.48 kg), whereas the total weight of the experimental balance set-up with thruster and counterweights in the present study is 107.91 N (≈11 kg). However, load capacity normal to the rotation axis, which is especially important when changing the thruster set-up, is lower and thus only about 351.9 N per flexure pivot.
The reaction forces on the flexure pivots are calculated as design criteria. The most extreme case of a one sided applied load of F_{G} = 54 N based on the thruster mass m is used. Following Fig. 4, the reaction force F_{R} can be calculated by
where L = 500 mm is the length of the pendulum arm and d_{f} = 78 mm is the outer distance of the two flexure pivots, resulting in a reaction force of F_{R} = 345.90 N, which is lower than the load capacity of a flexure pivot in that direction.
Damping of the balance is achieved by a passive eddy current damper, consisting of an aluminum plate and two permanent magnets located on the opposite side of the balance arm the thruster is mounted on.
To calibrate the balance, a series of known weights are attached to the balance arm by the calibration mechanism shown in Fig. 3(b). The gravitational force of each weight is redirected by using a pulley with polytetrafluoroethylene bearings to minimize frictional losses. A DC-motor is used for successively adding of each of ten calibration weights to the balance. Atmospheric, as well as in situ, calibration and single and multiple calibration runs with automatic averaging of calibration coefficients are possible at all operational stages.
To avoid zero force load and non-linear force behavior, the thrust balance is leveled prior to calibration and measurement. Leveling is done manually by adding distance plates between the support structure of the balance and the vacuum chamber on two points, while the third supporting point stays fixed.
B. Measurement of displacement—Strain gauge sensor
To measure thrust forces, a strain gauge based force sensor shown in Fig. 5 was developed. The sensor’s four strain gauges are connected in a full Wheatstone bridge naturally offering temperature compensation. In addition, the chosen strain gauges FAE2-A6174J-35-S13E, from Vishay Precision Group, are temperature compensated for aluminum, which is the material for the flexure member of the sensor. The remaining parts of the sensor are made from stainless steel.
The sensor was mechanically designed on the basis of analytical analysis of displacement and force induced strain ε(z) with the objective of maximization of strain resolution without damaging structural and elastic integrity of the used strain gauges and flexure member. From Fig. 6, the induced force F_{S} on the tip of the sensor is given by
where F_{T} is the thrust force, l_{s} is the distance between the rotational axis of the balance and the sensor tip, and M_{T} is the restoring moment of the flexure pivots. With linear assumption of small deflections x of the thruster
in which k_{FP} = 31.2 N cm/rad is the spring constant for the chosen F-20 flexure pivots. To calculate the displacement of the sensor under a load case, classical beam theory may be used.
In Fig. 7, the load induced force F_{D} in the end of the flexure member is
and the corresponding torque moment M_{D} is given by
Assuming that the head of the sensor, where the tip is mounted in, does not bend due to the much larger cross section, the vertical displacement of the sensor tip d_{s} in Fig. 7 is then
whereas the displacement of the thruster is
To calculate the displacement d_{d}, we use
as a function of z and
to obtain the function of the curvature by superposition [26]
in which E is Young’s modulus and I_{m} is the moment of inertia for a rectangular cross section [26].d_{d} is then
The angle of deflection at the end of the flexure member is obtained by differentiation
The strain on the surface of the flexural member is obtained by second differentiation of w(z) and multiplying with half of the height h_{d}/2 of the flexure member
For the design thrust force of F_{T} = 125 mN and the iteratively determined geometrical data of the sensor present in Fig. 5, the displacement of the sensor tip is calculated to d_{s} = 0.441 mm using Eqs. (11) and (4), respectively, (5). From the known displacement d_{d}, the thruster displacement is calculated to x = 2.2 mm with Eq. (7), which in return yields a load on the tip of the sensor of approximately F_{S} = 598 mN using Eqs. (2) and (3). Subsequently the strain on the surface of the flexure member at z_{SG} = 3 mm is calculated via Eq. (13) to approximately ε(z_{SG}) = ±576 μm/m, which is well within the maximum design strain of ε_{dsn} = ±1650 μm/m for the used strain gauges.
C. Analytical prediction of balance dynamics
It is common practice to predict the dynamic behavior of a thrust balance by the theory of a harmonic oscillator. For the presented thrust balance, the theory of a harmonic oscillator without damping is applied since damping effects caused by the thruster’s wires and supply feeds for gas and pressure measurement are hard to predict.
The moment of inertia about the y-axis (see Fig. 4) for the whole balance set-up was estimated from the CAD (Computer Aided Design) model presented in Fig. 3(a) to approximately J = 1.05 kg m^{2} at a rotation of 2.22 × 10^{−2} rad. Applying the design thrust of F_{T} = 125 mN, an angular rotation of φ = 7.7 × 10^{−5} rad is obtained, which in return gives the spring constant k_{TB} for the whole balance set-up under the assumption that the thrust force is compensated by the restoring moment of the balance set-up. The spring constant is then
The natural frequency ν_{0} of the system is obtained by
which results in a oscillation period of
D. Operation and data acquisition control
For balance operation and data acquisition, a control program on the basis of a LabVIEW distribution and data acquisition hardware from National Instruments was developed. The program is capable of running single and multiple calibration loops with automatic averaging and zeroing of calibration coefficients. The number of loops of a calibration run, as well as parameters like the DC-motor speed, and the stop time between each calibration point can be set. The calibration data are saved as text file and can later be imported, if no new calibration run is necessary. Single and long time measurements of thrust are possible by continuous data acquisition.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Linearity and stability of calibration
Calibration of the thrust balance was conducted under atmospheric conditions, as well as in situ under thruster operation vacuum conditions, whereas no noticeable deviation in the quality of the calibration was observed. Prior to the calibration, the thrust balance set-up was leveled. The complete thrust balance set-up as shown in Fig. 3(a) was used for calibration as recommended by Polk et_al [27], to take influence and additional effects from wires and thruster feed lines into account.
To calibrate the balance, ten known weights of approximately 2.1 g each were used. The calibration weights were reweighed with an accuracy of 0.001 g to exactly predict the applied calibration force F_{C}. The weight of the thread was also considered by weighting and incremental adding to the calibration weights. With a weight of 0.032 g for the full length thread, additional calibration forces are considered to be minimal. The calibration weights were then lowered by the calibration mechanism, applying a stepwise calibration force up to F_{C,max} = 113.452 mN to the balance. After reaching F_{C,max}, all calibration weights were pulled up at once and the system returned to its initial state, after which the calibration loop restarted. Seven calibration loops per run were performed with subsequent averaging of calibration coefficients.
In Fig. 8, the result of a seven loop calibration run is presented, where the applied calibration force F_{C} = a · U_{S} is a function of the sensor’s boosted output voltage U_{S}. The linear regression is set to the point of origin to achieve a zero force at zero load correlation. As can be seen from Fig. 8, the sensor and the calibration system yield excellent linearity, with an R^{2} correlation [28] of R^{2} = 0.999 975. The quality of the calibration is also confirmed by the plot of Standardized Residuals [27] of each calibration point in Fig. 9. The Standardized Residuals are distributed randomly in a −2 to 2 interval, which confirms that the linear assumption for the fit in Fig. 8 is correct.
To test the stability of the calibration, three calibration runs with five calibration loops for the first run and seven loops each for the second and third run were performed, whereas the last calibration run was conducted 24 h after the first. In Fig. 10, the slope a of the linear fit of each loop for calibration runs 1-3 is shown. The horizontal line indicates the averaged value for the slope of all present loops. As shown in Fig. 10, small deviations from the average value are present, but in general relative deviation is under 0.5% (dashed line indication), which confirms the quality of the calibration. The only exceptions were observed for the coefficient of the second run’s first and last loop. During all calibration runs presented in Fig. 10, variation of ambient temperature did not exceed 1 K.
B. Sensor noise, measurement range, and accuracy estimation
To determine the resolution of the developed sensor, the base noise without load is considered. A typical zero thrust noise signal from the sensor is presented in Fig. 11. Despite small arbitrary rises in the signal (e.g., between 40 and 50 s), which may be caused by the characteristics of the used amplifier, the signal is constant. Signal noise is present but small and conservatively estimated to be within 15 μN.
Despite the noise present in the sensor’s signal in Fig. 11, thrust forces in the range of μN may be resolved and measured. As a demonstration, raw measurement data F_{M} of the two smallest measured thrust forces in the experimental series, presented in Sec. IV D, are shown in relation to the sensor’s noise in Fig. 12. As can be seen from the figure, a clear distinction between the sensor’s noise and the signal under load is present, even under consideration of increased noise up to ±40 μN under load.
A further analysis of the sensor’s noise and the noise present under load is given by the measured noise spectra in Fig. 13 obtained by Fourier transformation. The zero noise spectrum (black) is obtained from the data presented in Fig. 11, while the two noise spectra (turquoise, purple) for the steady state thrust forces of F_{T} = 29 μN and F_{T} = 65 μN are transformations of raw measurement data in Fig. 12. The third spectrum under load for F_{T} = 0.8 mN (blue) is derived from the data of Fig. 18 and represents an unsteady thrust case under transient oscillation. A clear distinction between the zero spectrum and those spectra under load is present for all cases in Fig. 13. Additional thrust noise is seen for frequencies between 0.25 and 3 Hz and may be seen for some higher frequencies around 10 Hz. The local maxima of ν_{0} = 0.81 Hz, present in the spectrum for F_{T} = 0.8 mN, represent the natural frequency of the thrust balance, leading to an experimental measured oscillation period of T_{B,exp} = 1.23 s, which is further discussed in Sec. IV C.
The Fourier analysis of the thrust balance’s excitation around the natural frequency present in the spectrum for F_{T} = 0.8 mN in Fig. 13 is used to separate the balances dynamics from the thrust noise under load. A 6th order Butterworth [1,29] band-stop filter is used, to eliminate the balance’s natural frequency and its harmonics from the raw data presented in Fig. 12. The results for the filtered data are presented in Fig. 14. As can be seen, the noise present for F_{T} = 29 μN and F_{T} = 65 μN is reduced and can now clearly be accounted for thrust noise, thus enabling the time dependent analysis of thrust production.
Further data processing may be conducted to reduce the overall and the specific thrust noise of the measurement data in Fig. 14. For this purpose, a 2nd order Savitzky-Golay [30] smoothing filter with a window of 10 data points is used on the data presented in Fig. 14. As a result, almost all noise in the measurement data presented in Fig. 15 is eliminated. The usage of the Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter furthermore reveals a low frequency (<0.1 Hz) oscillation present in all measurement data but obviously seen for F_{T} = 65 μN. Since trust noise is supposed to be of higher frequencies and the balance dynamic frequencies were previously eliminated from the data, the disturbance, due to its low frequency, is associated with the vacuum chamber, the balance is placed in.
To finally estimate a steady state thrust value, an interval of chosen length of likewise post-processed measurement data is averaged and the likewise averaged sensor noise is subtracted, which automatically corrects the results for drift of the zero signal [31].
The sensor was originally designed and calibrated for a design thrust force of 125 mN. However, the design parameters of the used strain gauges and the material of the sensor’s flexure member allow for higher applied forces of up to 225 mN, without damaging the set-up, nor harming the ±5° maximum for the linear assumption of deflection. To demonstrate the extended capabilities of the set-up four reweighed load weights of approximately 10.5 g each are applied to the thrust balance, to generate equivalent forces F_{A} of up to 225 mN. In Fig. 16, the response of the thrust balance is presented. As can be seen from the figure, a close to unity, linear relation of applied to measured force F_{M} is achieved up to 225 mN. Relative deviations from applied to measured forces can be estimated to be under 1%.
From Figs. 8, 11, 12, and 16, the ratio of measurement range to resolution for a balance system with the present type of sensor can be estimated. Using the estimation of 15 μN for the sensor noise and the upper range end of the calibration of 125 mN, a ratio of approx. 8333 is calculated. Under consideration of the maximum tested applied load of 225 mN in Fig. 16, a ratio of approx. 15 000 is calculated, which is one of the highest documented ratios in the literature. For example, Cesare et_al [19] developed a state-of-the-art hanging pendulum type balance for a measurement range of 0-1 mN with a range to resolution ratio of roughly 10 000. A second example is the torsional type thrust balance developed by Yang et_al [32], which yielded a range to resolution ratio of approximately 3000 for a measurement range of 0-264 μN.
To predict the accuracy of the balance set-up, the long time, temperature dependent zero drift is analyzed. As can be seen from Fig. 17, the drift of the zero thrust signal from the sensor can be estimated to be within 80 μN over a span of five and a half hours. A correlation to the change of simultaneously recorded ambient temperature is present. To take the drift of the zero signal into account, and to achieve high precision and reliable measurements, recorded thrust values are corrected by the immediately afterwards measured zero thrust signal.
Since these temperature effects are immediately corrected during calibration and measurement by differential data processing, the accuracy of the balance is roughly estimated on the basis of the present noise under load of ±30 μN (Fig. 14) and from the maximum deviation present in the relation of measured to applied loads in Fig. 16. The resulting total accuracy is estimated to be
C. Dynamic unsteady balance behavior
To experimentally investigate the dynamic behavior of the balance, the passive eddy current damper was removed, while the rest of the set-up remained as presented in Fig. 3(a). Applying a small thrust force, the balance was deflected from its initial state and the oscillation characteristics of the sensor output was recorded for 20 s while the thruster was constantly fired. The result of that test is shown in Fig. 18. The small damping present in the oscillation is caused by friction losses of the thruster feed lines.
From the curve, the experimental oscillation period is measured to T_{B,exp} = 1.23 s, which is about 19% smaller than the analytical value from Eq. (16). The reason is found in the analytical calculation of sensor displacement. In the calculation, neither the adhesive used to glue the strain gauges to the sensor nor the strain gauges themselves are considered. As a result, the analytical solution for the displacement x at a given load is larger than taking into account the additional stiffness. For a given load in the experiment, a smaller displacement and subsequently a smaller angular rotation are present. This leads to a larger spring constant k_{TB} of the system as has been calculated in Eq. (14). The larger spring constant in return leads to a higher natural frequency and a smaller oscillation period as has been predicted.
The smaller experimental displacement leads to a smaller strain on the surface of the flexure member of the sensor, but the strain should again be well within the design strain ε_{dsn} of the strain gauges.
D. Steady state thrust measurements
Finally, a series of steady state thrust measurements of argon mass flow rates are performed on the balance with the INGA IV thruster. Evaluated mass flow rates range from ṁ = 0.178 mg/s to ṁ = 71.360 mg/s using two thermal mass flowmeters from Bronkhorst (models: see Sec. II B). Variation of ambient and inflow gas temperature during the experimental series was constant within 1 K. In addition to experimental results, numerical results are also presented. For the numerical results, two solvers are used, based on kinetic, as well as continuum theory. Both solvers are part of version 2.4 of the open source software package OpenFOAM [33].
The compressible Navier-Stokes (NS) solver was developed and implemented by Greenshields et_al [34] It uses semi-discrete, non-staggered upwind schemes of Kurganov and Tadmor [35] and of Kurganov, Noelle, and Petrova [36] and is capable of modeling compressible, transient, and supersonic flows.
The second solver is a modified version of the Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) solver implemented by Scanlon [37], which uses kinetic gas theory and statistics to model rarefied gas flows. The solver is based on the original formulation proposed by Bird [38] in his monograph, using the No Time Counter scheme [39] and sub-cell generation to reduce collision separation, to achieve nearest neighbor collisions [39].
The results for the thrust measurement are shown in Fig. 19. An excellent agreement of numerical and experimental results for the thrust force F_{T} is seen for the higher mass flow rates between ṁ = 24.976 mg/s and ṁ = 71.360 mg/s. Deviations to numerical results are less than 2.5% here, whereas for most of the mass flow rates deviations are in the range 0.2%-1%. For mass flow rates lower than ṁ = 14.270 mg/s, deviations start to exceed 5% using the larger mass flowmeter. The uncorrelated drop of thrust is traced back to the used mass flow controller, which operates at its lower flow range limit at these mass flow rates, thus generating smaller mass flow rates than the nominally set value.
To extend the range of measured thrust, a second, smaller mass flowmeter is also used, enabling thrust measurements in the μN range. Measured mass flow rates are between ṁ = 0.178 mg/s and ṁ = 3.568 mg/s. It is seen that the experimental thrust series reproduces the numerical values well within the estimated accuracy. Deviations between experimental and numerical thrust range from 1% to 7.8%. The smallest reliable thrust value, which was possible to set with the current combination of thruster and mass flowmeter, is F_{T} = 29 μN. Note that, for the smallest measured values, prediction of thrust gets challenging due to uncertainties in set and actual mass flow rate, as well as, exact prediction of background pressure, which strongly influences thrust production at these small mass flow rates.
V. CONCLUSION
A thrust balance based on a torsional counterweighted pendulum was developed, capable of measuring thrust forces up to 225 mN with sub-milli-Newton precision. To achieve high resolution and accurate measurements, a new measurement technique based on a spring leaf sensor was developed. The sensor is based on a bending beam theory and strain gauges. A full Wheatstone bridge of strain gauges is used to measure the force induced deflection of the flexure member. The sensor and balance mechanics are analytically described to design their dimensions to fit design criteria of the used materials and strain gauges with the aim to maximize the sensor output signal.
The results show that the analytical description can be used to predict the dynamic behavior of the balance. The sensor yields excellent linearity and stability for the calibration with a correlation coefficient of R^{2} = 0.999 975. The chosen mechanical concept is capable of precisely and repeatedly measuring thrust forces with sub-milli-Newton resolution and accuracy. The base noise to the sensor determines the resolution and is within ±15 μN. The system yields one of the highest literature reported ratios of measurement range to resolution, with a value of approximately 15 000. Long time zero drift of the sensor’s signal is small and corrected by differential data processing. Frequency analysis of the measurement data and post-processing routines are presented and discussed to separate the balance dynamics from the thrust signal, to rise measurement precision. The accuracy of the balance is estimated to be within ± (30 μN + 1% · estimated value).
A series of thrust measurements in the range of 29 μN–37.04 mN are presented, which is in excellent agreement with numerical results, also confirming the validity of the calibration. Thus, the balance is a capable tool to precisely measure thrust forces of future thruster developments at ZARM.
FIG. 1. 
Schematic view of the large vacuum facility.
FIG. 2. 
Sectional view of the INGA IV thruster.
FIG. 3. 
(a) Thrust balance set-up with thruster and (b) calibration mechanism.
FIG. 4. 
Reaction forces on flexure pivots.
FIG. 5. 
Strain gauge based force sensor.
FIG. 6. 
Mechanics of the force sensor.
FIG. 7. 
Bending mechanics of the flexure member.
FIG. 8. 
Thrust balance calibration data for a seven loop calibration.
FIG. 9. 
Standardized Residuals for each calibration point.
FIG. 10. 
Comparison of calibration coefficients for each calibration loop.
FIG. 11. 
Sensor noise without load.
FIG. 12. 
Noise to thrust relation for small thrust steps.
FIG. 13. 
Noise spectra of the thrust balance without load and under load.
FIG. 14. 
Butterworth filtered measurement data for small thrust steps.
FIG. 15. 
Measurement data for small thrust steps with the applied Butterworth filter and smoothed by a Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter.
FIG. 16. 
Relation of measured to applied force.
FIG. 17. 
Long time drift of zero thrust signal with the temperature.
FIG. 18. 
Oscillation behavior of the balance at a given load.
FIG. 19. 
Experimentally and numerically obtained thrust. Experimental results: purple circles, numerical results: filled red squares Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC), and green squares compressible Navier Stokes (NS).
