Facile synthesis of gold nanostars over a wide size range and their excellent surface enhanced Raman scattering and fluorescence quenching properties
Surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) is an excellent technique for detecting the trace concentration of targets. However, SERS based detection of fluorescent targets is tricky as the fluorescence signal can severely interfere with the SERS signal upon resonance excitation. This can limit the trace detection capability of SERS. Herein, the authors demonstrate that Au nanostars (NSs) are excellent for fluorescence quenching and trace detection by SERS. The NS based SERS substrate was used to measure the R6G concentrations as low as 10 pM upon laser excitation that are in resonance with the fluorescence absorption. The authors used a simple seed-mediated and surfactant assisted method to synthesize AuNSs in a wide size range. The size of the NSs can be tuned from 55 nm to about 1 μm simply by varying the seed to HAuCl_{4} ratio in the growth solution.
I. INTRODUCTION
Noble metal nanoparticles have attracted much attention recently owing to their fascinating optical properties. They work as nanoscopic antennas by amplifying the incident and scattered electromagnetic beam. The incident electromagnetic radiation interacts with the conduction electrons and results in the confinement of electromagnetic energy around the nanoparticles. This makes the metallic nanoparticles an excellent candidate for surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) applications [1–6].
Anisotropic nanoparticles are usually much superior for SERS applications over their spherical counterparts owing to their much higher Raman enhancement factors (EFs) [7–13]. Nikoobakht and El-Sayed showed that the SERS enhancement of gold nanorods was much higher than nanospheres [14]. The higher enhancement for nanorods is due to the lightening rod effect. More anisotropic shapes such as nanostars (NSs) can have even higher EFs due to the presence of a number of sharp tips on each NS. Therefore, controlled synthesis of star-shaped nanoparticles has attracted great attention [15–21]. However, precise control over the growth kinetics is required to synthesize NSs of uniform size and shape. This in turn depends upon the delicate balance between the concentrations of various regents in the growth solution such as Au precursor, growth directional agents, and seed particles. Moreover, for the synthesis of NSs of different sizes, the recipe should be modified such that the change in size does not alter the shape of NSs. Barbosa et_al varied the concentration and size of seed particles in the growth solution to control the size of the synthesized Au NSs from 30 to 150 nm [19]. Similarly, Khoury and Vo-Dinh tuned the size of Au NSs from 45 to 116 nm by changing the concentration of seeds in the growth solution [18]. Blanch et_al were able to control the size of Au NSs from 100 to 200 nm by varying the concentration of reducing agent, ascorbic acid, in a seedless synthesis [20]. Verma et_al tuned the size of Au NSs from 30 to 150 nm by controlling the seed and surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), concentrations [21]. However, a simple synthesis protocol for tuning the size of Au NSs from tens of nanometers to micrometer scale has not been reported yet.
There is immense interest in using SERS for the detection of the trace concentration of targets. But for fluorophores, the presence of fluorescence signal can interfere with the trace detection using SERS. The fluorescence cross-section is typically 8–10 orders of magnitude greater than the Raman cross-section [22]. When excitation laser in resonance with the electronic excitation of the fluorophores is used, the fluorescence signal can overshadow the resonance Raman signal, making it difficult to detect trace concentrations using SERS. Therefore, off-resonance excitations are usually used for SERS to avoid fluorescence excitation. However, plasmon resonance of the SERS substrate, where the maximum electromagnetic SERS enhancement is expected, can be close to the electronic excitation energy of the fluorophore, in which case off resonance excitation can significantly lower the limit of detection of target molecules by SERS.
The close spatial proximity and overlap between the emission of the excited fluorophore and the plasmon band of the metal nanoparticles can result in nonradiative energy transfer from the exciton to the surface plasmon [23]. This can either lead to quenching or enhancement of the fluorescence. The surface plasmon can decay into a photon, with a faster spontaneous emission rate, which results in the enhancement of fluorescence emission. On the other hand, if a dark surface plasmon mode is excited, it ends up dissipating its energy in the form of absorption, which results in fluorescence quenching. This process is known as exciton plasmon resonant energy transfer [23]. The probability of the excitation of a dark surface plasmon mode increases if the emitter is very close to the nanoparticle. Moreover, Dexter energy transfer is enhanced for shorter distances which also lead to the fluorescence quenching [24]. Therefore, nanoparticle induced fluorescence enhancement or quenching depends sensitively on the distance of fluorophore from the nanoparticle. Anger et_al has experimentally demonstrated a continuous transition between fluorescent enhancement and fluorescence quenching by measuring the change in the fluorescence rate of a Nile blue molecule when its distance from 80 nm Au nanoparticles was varied [25]. They observed that at a distance of about 5 nm, the fluorescence enhancement reached a maximum. For shorter distances, fluorescence quenching was dominant.
Fluorescence quenching has been reported for numerous SERS substrates [26–28]. These substrates usually contain nanostructures that are surfactant free. The presence of a surfactant layer on the nanoparticle surface prevents the fluorophore from approaching too close to the metal surface, where fluorescence quenching is dominant. However, anisotropic nanoparticles are usually fabricated by directional growth, which can only be induced in the presence of surfactants. Recently, it was demonstrated that CTAB capped rod-shaped gold nanoparticles can be used to enhance both fluorescence and Raman signal through metal enhanced fluorescence (MEF) and SERS, respectively [29]. The presence of 4 nm thick surfactant CTAB bilayer on nanorod's surface acts as a spacer, which keeps fluorophores at a distance where fluorescence quenching is decreased and MEF is dominant [29]. The simultaneous enhancement of fluorescence and Raman signal is interesting, but the presence of a strong fluorescence signal could prevent achieving lower limits of detections. This can affect the use of these anisotropic nanoparticles as universal SERS substrates.
A surfactant-free synthesis of NSs has also been demonstrated, which could be suitable for fluorescence quenching applications [30]. However, these NSs are not stable and degrade to spherical nanoparticles within a couple of weeks [31]. Herein, we demonstrate the synthesis of gold NSs of sizes ranging from 55 nm to 1.05 μm, using a simple CTAB assisted, seed-mediated method. We believe that this may be the largest size range ever reported for NSs. The NSs are stable for months under laboratory conditions. Due to noncompact binding of CTAB to the NS surface, they show excellent fluorescence quenching and SERS properties. A limit of detection of 10 pM was achieved for R6G under resonance electronic excitation conditions. The EF obtained by us is 10^{8}–10^{9}. Although simultaneous fluorescence quenching and Raman enhancement have previously been demonstrated for Au films formed by thermal evaporation [27] and nanostructures formed by pulsed laser [25], with an EF of the order of 10^{10}–10^{11}, the fabrication process involves expensive equipment. The synthesis by chemical method is relatively cheaper and much more straightforward which makes our NSs promising for SERS based sensing of fluorophores.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
All vials were cleaned by aqua regia and washed with distilled water prior to the experiments. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Deionized water was used for making all solutions.
A. Preparation of seed solution
For the preparation of seeds, HAuCl_{4} (50 μl, 0.1 M) and sodium citrate (50 μl, 0.1 M) were added to distilled water (18 ml) under continuous stirring. Then, ice cold NaBH_{4} (600 μl, 0.1 M) was added, and the solution was left to rest for 2 h. The coloration of seeds was wine red.
B. Preparation of star-shaped nanoparticles
For the preparation of growth solution, HAuCl_{4} (250 μl, 0.1 M) was added to CTAB solution (10 ml, 0.1 M), followed by the addition of AgNO_{3} (50 μl, 0.1 M). Afterward, aqueous solution of ascorbic acid (350 μl, 0.1 M) was added. Finally, seed solution of various concentrations was added. In order to avoid the dilution errors, seed solution was diluted such that the added volume was always 25 μl for each sample. The added seed volumes with respect to the original seed solution were 25 μl, 5 μl, 0.5 μl, and 25 nl. The solution was briefly mixed after the addition of seed solution and then left undisturbed overnight at 26 °C. The solution was subsequently centrifuged twice at 10 000 rounds per minute (rpm). The precipitates were redispersed in deionized water. The SERS substrates were fabricated by drying 20 μl of the concentrated centrifuged solution of NSs on the glass substrate. The solution of R6G of different concentrations was later dried on top of NSs. In order to measure the reference, same concentration of R6G solution was dried on a glass slide without NSs.
C. Characterization
UV-Vis spectra were taken with Lambda 950 UV-Vis spectrometer. Raman spectra were taken with Dongwoo Optron Raman spectroscope using a 514 nm argon ion laser at a power of 10 mW. The exposure time was 10 s. The imaging was done my Nova NanoSEM 200 scanning electron microscope (SEM) and Philips CM 300ST transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 1 depicts the SEM images of NSs prepared with different seed concentrations, while keeping the concentration of other regents the same, as described in Sec. II. Figure 1(a) depicts the NSs prepared by using 25 μl of seed solution. Each particle seems to have a number of branches, protruding from a central region. The NSs have an average size of about 55 nm. Decreasing the seed concentration to 5 μl increases the average NS size to about 130 nm. With further decrease in the seeds' concentration, the average NS size increased to 290 nm. Moreover, the protruding tips became longer and thicker. Finally, NSs having an average size greater than 1 μm can be obtained by decreasing the seed concentration to 25 nl, as shown in Fig. 1(d). It is also interesting to note that both branch length and number of branches increases with decrease in the seed concentration.
Figure 2 depicts the TEM image of a NS synthesized with 5 μl seed solution. As evident from the image, a number of branches of different lengths are present on NS. Close examination of a number of branches revealed that some of them were single crystalline while others were multitwinned. Figure 2(b) depicts a high resolution TEM image of a single crystalline branch. The prominent fringes have a spacing of 2.03 Å, which is the interplaner spacing of {200} plane. Figure 2(c) depicts the high-resolution TEM image of the branch containing twining. The twin boundaries are notched at {111} planes, which is the low energy configuration in FCC crystal for a twin boundary [32,33].
In seed assisted method, the particle growth happens by reduction and deposition of Au ions on top of the seed particles. In growth solution, Au(III) ions are being reduced by ascorbic acid which is a weak reducing agent. Ascorbic acid can only reduce Au(III) to Au(I) in the growth solution [34]. For complete reduction of Au ions, the presence of seed particles, which provide catalytic effect for reduction of Au ions, is essential. This leads to the complete reduction, and subsequent deposition, of Au ions on top of seeds. The silver assisted growths of citrate capped penta-twinned seeds have been shown to grow into bi-pyramidal shaped nanoparticles [35]. The penta-twined seeds have five twin boundaries, all of them being {111} planes. This results in the presence of two types of corners in these seeds (see Fig. 3); five corners formed at the meeting point of two adjacent tetrahedron corners (labeled as corner I) and two diagonally opposite corners, formed at the meeting point of five tetrahedral corners (labeled as corner II). The growth directions along corners I and II are ⟨112⟩ and ⟨110⟩, respectively [36]. Bi-pyramidal structure is obtained when the growth is faster along type-II corner (⟨110⟩ direction) [35]. For the synthesis of NSs, we also used citrate-capped penta-twinned seeds, but a five times higher concentrations of HAuCl_{4}, ascorbic acid, and AgNO_{3} than what is usually used for seed-mediated synthesis of nanobipyramids. A higher concentration of reagents in the growth solution may result in a faster growth kinetics [37]. This may lead to the growth of branches from both types of seed corners, resulting in the formation of a number of branches. It has also been postulated that the presence of twin defects weakens the binding of surfactant CTAB, leading to the growth of branches from these sites [21]. For the same concentration of Au monomers and lower concentration of seeds, more Au per seed is available which would eventually cause the formation of larger NSs. For larger growing particles, newly formed defects can also act as active sites for branch formation. The branches perturbing out of corners are usually twinned [38] and the branches starting from newly formed defects are possibly single crystal.
Figure 4 shows UV-Vis spectra of the NSs. The NSs synthesized with 25 μl seed concentration show a well-defined plasmon peak around 620 nm. For spherical nanoparticles of similar size (55 nm), the plasmon peak is close to 560 nm. So, there is a significant red-shift in the plasmon peak of the NSs, relative to their spherical counterparts of similar size. This is due to the presence of plasmon modes along the length of the branches. Moreover, Hao et_al has demonstrated that the plasmon hybridization between the branches and central core leads to the further red-shift in the plasmon peak positions [39]. For samples prepared with 5 μl seeds, the plasmon peak was shifted to 740 nm. The red-shift in the plasmon peak is due to the increase in the size of NSs. For even lower seed concentrations, the plasmon peak is red-shifted even more, lying beyond the range of our spectrometer.
The Raman spectra for 1 μM R6G with and without Au substrate are shown in Fig. 5(a). The spectra collected in the absence of Au NSs showed a broad featureless peak, which is the characteristic fluorescence peak of R6G. The fluorescence absorbance of R6G resonates with the excitation wavelength of our laser (514 nm). For the same concentration of R6G deposited on Au NSs, the fluorescence peak has been significantly quenched. This is due to the nonradiative transfer of energy to the metal, due to the presence of R6G close to the metal nanoparticle surface [24]. The quenching of fluorescence in our case may indicate the availability of open spaces on NS surface for the fluorophores, which in turn means a noncompact binding of CTAB to surface of NS (see Fig. 3). The anisotropic binding of CTAB to Au surface is well known. CTAB usually has a lower affinity for low energy faces of the Au surface [34]. Moreover, it has also been postulated that the presence of twin defects can also weaken the CTAB binding [36]. Therefore, NS's surface is not completely covered with the bilayer of CTAB. This means that the fluorophores can access the nanoparticle's surface through the openings present in the bilayer, leading to significant quenching of the fluorescence signal. The fluorescence quenching significantly improved the visibility of Raman peaks. We have seen the signature Raman spectra of R6G. The most prominent peaks at 610, 773, 1373, 1521, 1581, and 1664 cm^{−1} agree well with other reported peaks of R6G [40–42].
The EF of NSs can be calculated by using the method described by Gupta and Weimer [26]. For the measurement without NSs, the intensity of the fluorescence peak (I_{Flu}) depends upon the fluorescence cross-section (σ_{Flu}) of R6G and number of molecules contributing to the signal. On the other hand, the intensity of the SERS peak (I_{Ram}) is proportional to the resonance Raman cross-section (σ_{Ram}), molecules contributing to the signal and the EF. As the droplet of same concentration of R6G was dried on the substrate in both cases, we can assume that the number of molecules under the laser spot, contributing to the I_{Flu} and I_{Ram}, are the same. The EF is this case is given by the following equation:
The values of σ_{Ram} and σ_{Flu} for R6G are 10^{−25} and 10^{−16} cm^{2}/sr, respectively [26]. The value of I_{Ram} (after subtracting the residual fluorescence background) for sample prepared with 25 μl seed volume is 15 000 cps, and the value of I_{Flu} at the same position is 55 000 cps. Substituting these values to Eq. (1) yields the EF of around 10^{8}–10^{9}. For larger NSs (sample prepared with 25 nl seed volume), the value of I_{Ram} is slightly lower which results in a slightly lower value of EF for this sample. This could be due to the fact that the electromagnetic enhancement for smaller NSs is higher compared to the larger NSs because the plasmon peak position of smaller NSs is closer to the excitation laser wavelength of 514 nm. Nonetheless, we have seen significant fluorescence quenching for both samples.
Figure 5(b) shows the change in Raman peak intensities with decreasing target concentration. The height of all peaks decreases with the decrease in target concentration. However, we have seen good signal to noise ratio till concentrations as low as 10 pM. This shows excellent SERS sensing abilities of Au NSs, despite the fluorescence excitation.
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple seed mediated method for synthesizing Au NSs over a wide size range. NSs larger than micrometer can be synthesized simply by decreasing the seed concentration. The NSs have the potential to be excellent SERS substrates owing to their very high Raman EFs originating from their special shape and the fluorescence quenching properties.
Fig. 1. 
SEM images of NSs prepared with seed concentration of 25 μl (a), 5 μl (b), 0.5 μl (c), and 25 nl (d). The scale bar is 100 nm.
Fig. 2. 
(Color online) (a) TEM image of a single NS. (b) High resolution TEM image of a single crystalline tip; lattice spacing of 0.203 nm corresponds to {200} planes. (c) A twinned tip; lattice spacing of 0.235 nm corresponds to {111} planes, and red lines in (c) show the twinned boundaries.
Fig. 3. 
(Color online) Carton of penta-twinned seeds with two type of corners (left) and Au NS CTAB and R6G binding (right).
Fig. 4. 
(Color online) UV-Vis plots of NSs synthesized with different seed concentrations.
Fig. 5. 
(Color online) (a) Comparison of Raman spectra of 10^{−}^{6 }M R6G in the absence (i), and presence of NSs prepared with 25 μl NSs (ii) and 25 nl (iii) seeds; (b) Raman spectra of various concentrations of R6G with NSs prepared with 25 μl seeds.
